NAME
====

clone, \__clone2, clone3 - create a child process

SYNOPSIS
========

::

   /* Prototype for the glibc wrapper function */

   #define _GNU_SOURCE
   #include <sched.h>

   int clone(int (*fn)(void *), void *stack",int flags ,void*"arg, ... 
    /* pid_t *parent_tid, void *tls",pid_t*"child_tid */ );

   /* For the prototype of the raw clone() system call, see NOTES */

   long clone3(struct clone_args *cl_args, size_t size);

*Note*: There is not yet a glibc wrapper for **clone3**\ (); see NOTES.

DESCRIPTION
===========

These system calls create a new ("child") process, in a manner similar
to **fork**\ (2).

By contrast with **fork**\ (2), these system calls provide more precise
control over what pieces of execution context are shared between the
calling process and the child process. For example, using these system
calls, the caller can control whether or not the two processes share the
virtual address space, the table of file descriptors, and the table of
signal handlers. These system calls also allow the new child process to
be placed in separate **namespaces**\ (7).

Note that in this manual page, "calling process" normally corresponds to
"parent process". But see the descriptions of **CLONE_PARENT** and
**CLONE_THREAD** below.

This page describes the following interfaces:

-  The glibc **clone**\ () wrapper function and the underlying system
   call on which it is based. The main text describes the wrapper
   function; the differences for the raw system call are described
   toward the end of this page.

-  The newer **clone3**\ () system call.

In the remainder of this page, the terminology "the clone call" is used
when noting details that apply to all of these interfaces,

The clone() wrapper function
----------------------------

When the child process is created with the **clone**\ () wrapper
function, it commences execution by calling the function pointed to by
the argument *fn*. (This differs from **fork**\ (2), where execution
continues in the child from the point of the **fork**\ (2) call.) The
*arg* argument is passed as the argument of the function *fn*.

When the *fn*\ (*arg*) function returns, the child process terminates.
The integer returned by *fn* is the exit status for the child process.
The child process may also terminate explicitly by calling **exit**\ (2)
or after receiving a fatal signal.

The *stack* argument specifies the location of the stack used by the
child process. Since the child and calling process may share memory, it
is not possible for the child process to execute in the same stack as
the calling process. The calling process must therefore set up memory
space for the child stack and pass a pointer to this space to
**clone**\ (). Stacks grow downward on all processors that run Linux
(except the HP PA processors), so *stack* usually points to the topmost
address of the memory space set up for the child stack. Note that
**clone**\ () does not provide a means whereby the caller can inform the
kernel of the size of the stack area.

The remaining arguments to **clone**\ () are discussed below.

clone3()
--------

The **clone3**\ () system call provides a superset of the functionality
of the older **clone**\ () interface. It also provides a number of API
improvements, including: space for additional flags bits; cleaner
separation in the use of various arguments; and the ability to specify
the size of the child's stack area.

As with **fork**\ (2), **clone3**\ () returns in both the parent and the
child. It returns 0 in the child process and returns the PID of the
child in the parent.

The *cl_args* argument of **clone3**\ () is a structure of the following
form:

::

   struct clone_args {
       u64 flags;        /* Flags bit mask */
       u64 pidfd;        /* Where to store PID file descriptor
                            (pid_t *) */
       u64 child_tid;    /* Where to store child TID,
                            in child's memory (pid_t *) */
       u64 parent_tid;   /* Where to store child TID,
                            in parent's memory (int *) */
       u64 exit_signal;  /* Signal to deliver to parent on
                            child termination */
       u64 stack;        /* Pointer to lowest byte of stack */
       u64 stack_size;   /* Size of stack */
       u64 tls;          /* Location of new TLS */
       u64 set_tid;      /* Pointer to a pid_t array
                            (since Linux 5.5) */
       u64 set_tid_size; /* Number of elements in set_tid
                            (since Linux 5.5) */
       u64 cgroup;       /* File descriptor for target cgroup
                            of child (since Linux 5.7) */
   };

The *size* argument that is supplied to **clone3**\ () should be
initialized to the size of this structure. (The existence of the *size*
argument permits future extensions to the *clone_args* structure.)

The stack for the child process is specified via *cl_args.stack*, which
points to the lowest byte of the stack area, and *cl_args.stack_size*,
which specifies the size of the stack in bytes. In the case where the
**CLONE_VM** flag (see below) is specified, a stack must be explicitly
allocated and specified. Otherwise, these two fields can be specified as
NULL and 0, which causes the child to use the same stack area as the
parent (in the child's own virtual address space).

The remaining fields in the *cl_args* argument are discussed below.

Equivalence between clone() and clone3() arguments
--------------------------------------------------

Unlike the older **clone**\ () interface, where arguments are passed
individually, in the newer **clone3**\ () interface the arguments are
packaged into the *clone_args* structure shown above. This structure
allows for a superset of the information passed via the **clone**\ ()
arguments.

The following table shows the equivalence between the arguments of
**clone**\ () and the fields in the *clone_args* argument supplied to
**clone3**\ ():

   ============= =============== =============================
   clone()       clone3()        Notes
   \             *cl_args* field 
   flags & ~0xff flags           For most flags; details below
   parent_tid    pidfd           See CLONE_PIDFD
   child_tid     child_tid       See CLONE_CHILD_SETTID
   parent_tid    parent_tid      See CLONE_PARENT_SETTID
   flags & 0xff  exit_signal     
   stack         stack           
   ---           stack_size      
   tls           tls             See CLONE_SETTLS
   ---           set_tid         See below for details
   ---           set_tid_size    
   ---           cgroup          See CLONE_INTO_CGROUP
   ============= =============== =============================

The child termination signal
----------------------------

When the child process terminates, a signal may be sent to the parent.
The termination signal is specified in the low byte of *flags*
(**clone**\ ()) or in *cl_args.exit_signal* (**clone3**\ ()). If this
signal is specified as anything other than **SIGCHLD**, then the parent
process must specify the **\__WALL** or **\__WCLONE** options when
waiting for the child with **wait**\ (2). If no signal (i.e., zero) is
specified, then the parent process is not signaled when the child
terminates.

The set_tid array
-----------------

By default, the kernel chooses the next sequential PID for the new
process in each of the PID namespaces where it is present. When creating
a process with **clone3**\ (), the *set_tid* array (available since
Linux 5.5) can be used to select specific PIDs for the process in some
or all of the PID namespaces where it is present. If the PID of the
newly created process should be set only for the current PID namespace
or in the newly created PID namespace (if *flags* contains
**CLONE_NEWPID**) then the first element in the *set_tid* array has to
be the desired PID and *set_tid_size* needs to be 1.

If the PID of the newly created process should have a certain value in
multiple PID namespaces, then the *set_tid* array can have multiple
entries. The first entry defines the PID in the most deeply nested PID
namespace and each of the following entries contains the PID in the
corresponding ancestor PID namespace. The number of PID namespaces in
which a PID should be set is defined by *set_tid_size* which cannot be
larger than the number of currently nested PID namespaces.

To create a process with the following PIDs in a PID namespace
hierarchy:

   ============ ============= =======================
   PID NS level Requested PID Notes
   0            31496         Outermost PID namespace
   1            42            
   2            7             Innermost PID namespace
   ============ ============= =======================

Set the array to:

::

   set_tid[0] = 7;
   set_tid[1] = 42;
   set_tid[2] = 31496;
   set_tid_size = 3;

If only the PIDs in the two innermost PID namespaces need to be
specified, set the array to:

::

   set_tid[0] = 7;
   set_tid[1] = 42;
   set_tid_size = 2;

The PID in the PID namespaces outside the two innermost PID namespaces
will be selected the same way as any other PID is selected.

The *set_tid* feature requires **CAP_SYS_ADMIN** in all owning user
namespaces of the target PID namespaces.

Callers may only choose a PID greater than 1 in a given PID namespace if
an **init** process (i.e., a process with PID 1) already exists in that
namespace. Otherwise the PID entry for this PID namespace must be 1.

The flags mask
--------------

Both **clone**\ () and **clone3**\ () allow a flags bit mask that
modifies their behavior and allows the caller to specify what is shared
between the calling process and the child process. This bit mask—the
*flags* argument of **clone**\ () or the *cl_args.flags* field passed to
**clone3**\ ()—is referred to as the *flags* mask in the remainder of
this page.

The *flags* mask is specified as a bitwise-OR of zero or more of the
constants listed below. Except as noted below, these flags are available
(and have the same effect) in both **clone**\ () and **clone3**\ ().

**CLONE_CHILD_CLEARTID** (since Linux 2.5.49)
   Clear (zero) the child thread ID at the location pointed to by
   *child_tid* (**clone**\ ()) or *cl_args.child_tid* (**clone3**\ ())
   in child memory when the child exits, and do a wakeup on the futex at
   that address. The address involved may be changed by the
   **set_tid_address**\ (2) system call. This is used by threading
   libraries.

**CLONE_CHILD_SETTID** (since Linux 2.5.49)
   Store the child thread ID at the location pointed to by *child_tid*
   (**clone**\ ()) or *cl_args.child_tid* (**clone3**\ ()) in the
   child's memory. The store operation completes before the clone call
   returns control to user space in the child process. (Note that the
   store operation may not have completed before the clone call returns
   in the parent process, which will be relevant if the **CLONE_VM**
   flag is also employed.)

**CLONE_CLEAR_SIGHAND** (since Linux 5.5)
   By default, signal dispositions in the child thread are the same as
   in the parent. If this flag is specified, then all signals that are
   handled in the parent are reset to their default dispositions
   (**SIG_DFL**) in the child.

   Specifying this flag together with **CLONE_SIGHAND** is nonsensical
   and disallowed.

**CLONE_DETACHED** (historical)
   For a while (during the Linux 2.5 development series) there was a
   **CLONE_DETACHED** flag, which caused the parent not to receive a
   signal when the child terminated. Ultimately, the effect of this flag
   was subsumed under the **CLONE_THREAD** flag and by the time Linux
   2.6.0 was released, this flag had no effect. Starting in Linux 2.6.2,
   the need to give this flag together with **CLONE_THREAD**
   disappeared.

   This flag is still defined, but it is usually ignored when calling
   **clone**\ (). However, see the description of **CLONE_PIDFD** for
   some exceptions.

**CLONE_FILES** (since Linux 2.0)
   If **CLONE_FILES** is set, the calling process and the child process
   share the same file descriptor table. Any file descriptor created by
   the calling process or by the child process is also valid in the
   other process. Similarly, if one of the processes closes a file
   descriptor, or changes its associated flags (using the **fcntl**\ (2)
   **F_SETFD** operation), the other process is also affected. If a
   process sharing a file descriptor table calls **execve**\ (2), its
   file descriptor table is duplicated (unshared).

   If **CLONE_FILES** is not set, the child process inherits a copy of
   all file descriptors opened in the calling process at the time of the
   clone call. Subsequent operations that open or close file
   descriptors, or change file descriptor flags, performed by either the
   calling process or the child process do not affect the other process.
   Note, however, that the duplicated file descriptors in the child
   refer to the same open file descriptions as the corresponding file
   descriptors in the calling process, and thus share file offsets and
   file status flags (see **open**\ (2)).

**CLONE_FS** (since Linux 2.0)
   If **CLONE_FS** is set, the caller and the child process share the
   same filesystem information. This includes the root of the
   filesystem, the current working directory, and the umask. Any call to
   **chroot**\ (2), **chdir**\ (2), or **umask**\ (2) performed by the
   calling process or the child process also affects the other process.

   If **CLONE_FS** is not set, the child process works on a copy of the
   filesystem information of the calling process at the time of the
   clone call. Calls to **chroot**\ (2), **chdir**\ (2), or
   **umask**\ (2) performed later by one of the processes do not affect
   the other process.

**CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** (since Linux 5.7)
   By default, a child process is placed in the same version 2 cgroup as
   its parent. The **CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** flag allows the child process
   to be created in a different version 2 cgroup. (Note that
   **CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** has effect only for version 2 cgroups.)

   In order to place the child process in a different cgroup, the caller
   specifies **CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** in *cl_args.flags* and passes a file
   descriptor that refers to a version 2 cgroup in the *cl_args.cgroup*
   field. (This file descriptor can be obtained by opening a cgroup v2
   directory using either the **O_RDONLY** or the **O_PATH** flag.) Note
   that all of the usual restrictions (described in **cgroups**\ (7)) on
   placing a process into a version 2 cgroup apply.

   Among the possible use cases for **CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** are the
   following:

   -  Spawning a process into a cgroup different from the parent's
      cgroup makes it possible for a service manager to directly spawn
      new services into dedicated cgroups. This eliminates the
      accounting jitter that would be caused if the child process was
      first created in the same cgroup as the parent and then moved into
      the target cgroup. Furthermore, spawning the child process
      directly into a target cgroup is significantly cheaper than moving
      the child process into the target cgroup after it has been
      created.

   -  The **CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** flag also allows the creation of frozen
      child processes by spawning them into a frozen cgroup. (See
      **cgroups**\ (7) for a description of the freezer controller.)

   -  For threaded applications (or even thread implementations which
      make use of cgroups to limit individual threads), it is possible
      to establish a fixed cgroup layout before spawning each thread
      directly into its target cgroup.

**CLONE_IO** (since Linux 2.6.25)
   If **CLONE_IO** is set, then the new process shares an I/O context
   with the calling process. If this flag is not set, then (as with
   **fork**\ (2)) the new process has its own I/O context.

   The I/O context is the I/O scope of the disk scheduler (i.e., what
   the I/O scheduler uses to model scheduling of a process's I/O). If
   processes share the same I/O context, they are treated as one by the
   I/O scheduler. As a consequence, they get to share disk time. For
   some I/O schedulers, if two processes share an I/O context, they will
   be allowed to interleave their disk access. If several threads are
   doing I/O on behalf of the same process (**aio_read**\ (3), for
   instance), they should employ **CLONE_IO** to get better I/O
   performance.

   If the kernel is not configured with the **CONFIG_BLOCK** option,
   this flag is a no-op.

**CLONE_NEWCGROUP** (since Linux 4.6)
   Create the process in a new cgroup namespace. If this flag is not
   set, then (as with **fork**\ (2)) the process is created in the same
   cgroup namespaces as the calling process.

   For further information on cgroup namespaces, see
   **cgroup_namespaces**\ (7).

   Only a privileged process (**CAP_SYS_ADMIN**) can employ
   **CLONE_NEWCGROUP**.

**CLONE_NEWIPC** (since Linux 2.6.19)
   If **CLONE_NEWIPC** is set, then create the process in a new IPC
   namespace. If this flag is not set, then (as with **fork**\ (2)), the
   process is created in the same IPC namespace as the calling process.

   For further information on IPC namespaces, see
   **ipc_namespaces**\ (7).

   Only a privileged process (**CAP_SYS_ADMIN**) can employ
   **CLONE_NEWIPC**. This flag can't be specified in conjunction with
   **CLONE_SYSVSEM**.

**CLONE_NEWNET** (since Linux 2.6.24)
   (The implementation of this flag was completed only by about kernel
   version 2.6.29.)

   If **CLONE_NEWNET** is set, then create the process in a new network
   namespace. If this flag is not set, then (as with **fork**\ (2)) the
   process is created in the same network namespace as the calling
   process.

   For further information on network namespaces, see
   **network_namespaces**\ (7).

   Only a privileged process (**CAP_SYS_ADMIN**) can employ
   **CLONE_NEWNET**.

**CLONE_NEWNS** (since Linux 2.4.19)
   If **CLONE_NEWNS** is set, the cloned child is started in a new mount
   namespace, initialized with a copy of the namespace of the parent. If
   **CLONE_NEWNS** is not set, the child lives in the same mount
   namespace as the parent.

   For further information on mount namespaces, see **namespaces**\ (7)
   and **mount_namespaces**\ (7).

   Only a privileged process (**CAP_SYS_ADMIN**) can employ
   **CLONE_NEWNS**. It is not permitted to specify both **CLONE_NEWNS**
   and **CLONE_FS** in the same clone call.

**CLONE_NEWPID** (since Linux 2.6.24)
   If **CLONE_NEWPID** is set, then create the process in a new PID
   namespace. If this flag is not set, then (as with **fork**\ (2)) the
   process is created in the same PID namespace as the calling process.

   For further information on PID namespaces, see **namespaces**\ (7)
   and **pid_namespaces**\ (7).

   Only a privileged process (**CAP_SYS_ADMIN**) can employ
   **CLONE_NEWPID**. This flag can't be specified in conjunction with
   **CLONE_THREAD** or **CLONE_PARENT**.

**CLONE_NEWUSER**
   (This flag first became meaningful for **clone**\ () in Linux 2.6.23,
   the current **clone**\ () semantics were merged in Linux 3.5, and the
   final pieces to make the user namespaces completely usable were
   merged in Linux 3.8.)

   If **CLONE_NEWUSER** is set, then create the process in a new user
   namespace. If this flag is not set, then (as with **fork**\ (2)) the
   process is created in the same user namespace as the calling process.

   For further information on user namespaces, see **namespaces**\ (7)
   and **user_namespaces**\ (7).

   Before Linux 3.8, use of **CLONE_NEWUSER** required that the caller
   have three capabilities: **CAP_SYS_ADMIN**, **CAP_SETUID**, and
   **CAP_SETGID**. Starting with Linux 3.8, no privileges are needed to
   create a user namespace.

   This flag can't be specified in conjunction with **CLONE_THREAD** or
   **CLONE_PARENT**. For security reasons, **CLONE_NEWUSER** cannot be
   specified in conjunction with **CLONE_FS**.

**CLONE_NEWUTS** (since Linux 2.6.19)
   If **CLONE_NEWUTS** is set, then create the process in a new UTS
   namespace, whose identifiers are initialized by duplicating the
   identifiers from the UTS namespace of the calling process. If this
   flag is not set, then (as with **fork**\ (2)) the process is created
   in the same UTS namespace as the calling process.

   For further information on UTS namespaces, see
   **uts_namespaces**\ (7).

   Only a privileged process (**CAP_SYS_ADMIN**) can employ
   **CLONE_NEWUTS**.

**CLONE_PARENT** (since Linux 2.3.12)
   If **CLONE_PARENT** is set, then the parent of the new child (as
   returned by **getppid**\ (2)) will be the same as that of the calling
   process.

   If **CLONE_PARENT** is not set, then (as with **fork**\ (2)) the
   child's parent is the calling process.

   Note that it is the parent process, as returned by **getppid**\ (2),
   which is signaled when the child terminates, so that if
   **CLONE_PARENT** is set, then the parent of the calling process,
   rather than the calling process itself, will be signaled.

   The **CLONE_PARENT** flag can't be used in clone calls by the global
   init process (PID 1 in the initial PID namespace) and init processes
   in other PID namespaces. This restriction prevents the creation of
   multi-rooted process trees as well as the creation of unreapable
   zombies in the initial PID namespace.

**CLONE_PARENT_SETTID** (since Linux 2.5.49)
   Store the child thread ID at the location pointed to by *parent_tid*
   (**clone**\ ()) or *cl_args.parent_tid* (**clone3**\ ()) in the
   parent's memory. (In Linux 2.5.32-2.5.48 there was a flag
   **CLONE_SETTID** that did this.) The store operation completes before
   the clone call returns control to user space.

**CLONE_PID** (Linux 2.0 to 2.5.15)
   If **CLONE_PID** is set, the child process is created with the same
   process ID as the calling process. This is good for hacking the
   system, but otherwise of not much use. From Linux 2.3.21 onward, this
   flag could be specified only by the system boot process (PID 0). The
   flag disappeared completely from the kernel sources in Linux 2.5.16.
   Subsequently, the kernel silently ignored this bit if it was
   specified in the *flags* mask. Much later, the same bit was recycled
   for use as the **CLONE_PIDFD** flag.

**CLONE_PIDFD** (since Linux 5.2)
   If this flag is specified, a PID file descriptor referring to the
   child process is allocated and placed at a specified location in the
   parent's memory. The close-on-exec flag is set on this new file
   descriptor. PID file descriptors can be used for the purposes
   described in **pidfd_open**\ (2).

   -  When using **clone3**\ (), the PID file descriptor is placed at
      the location pointed to by *cl_args.pidfd*.

   -  When using **clone**\ (), the PID file descriptor is placed at the
      location pointed to by *parent_tid*. Since the *parent_tid*
      argument is used to return the PID file descriptor,
      **CLONE_PIDFD** cannot be used with **CLONE_PARENT_SETTID** when
      calling **clone**\ ().

   It is currently not possible to use this flag together with
   **CLONE_THREAD.** This means that the process identified by the PID
   file descriptor will always be a thread group leader.

   If the obsolete **CLONE_DETACHED** flag is specified alongside
   **CLONE_PIDFD** when calling **clone**\ (), an error is returned. An
   error also results if **CLONE_DETACHED** is specified when calling
   **clone3**\ (). This error behavior ensures that the bit
   corresponding to **CLONE_DETACHED** can be reused for further PID
   file descriptor features in the future.

**CLONE_PTRACE** (since Linux 2.2)
   If **CLONE_PTRACE** is specified, and the calling process is being
   traced, then trace the child also (see **ptrace**\ (2)).

**CLONE_SETTLS** (since Linux 2.5.32)
   The TLS (Thread Local Storage) descriptor is set to *tls*.

   The interpretation of *tls* and the resulting effect is architecture
   dependent. On x86, *tls* is interpreted as a *struct user_desc \**
   (see **set_thread_area**\ (2)). On x86-64 it is the new value to be
   set for the %fs base register (see the **ARCH_SET_FS** argument to
   **arch_prctl**\ (2)). On architectures with a dedicated TLS register,
   it is the new value of that register.

   Use of this flag requires detailed knowledge and generally it should
   not be used except in libraries implementing threading.

**CLONE_SIGHAND** (since Linux 2.0)
   If **CLONE_SIGHAND** is set, the calling process and the child
   process share the same table of signal handlers. If the calling
   process or child process calls **sigaction**\ (2) to change the
   behavior associated with a signal, the behavior is changed in the
   other process as well. However, the calling process and child
   processes still have distinct signal masks and sets of pending
   signals. So, one of them may block or unblock signals using
   **sigprocmask**\ (2) without affecting the other process.

   If **CLONE_SIGHAND** is not set, the child process inherits a copy of
   the signal handlers of the calling process at the time of the clone
   call. Calls to **sigaction**\ (2) performed later by one of the
   processes have no effect on the other process.

   Since Linux 2.6.0, the *flags* mask must also include **CLONE_VM** if
   **CLONE_SIGHAND** is specified

**CLONE_STOPPED** (since Linux 2.6.0)
   If **CLONE_STOPPED** is set, then the child is initially stopped (as
   though it was sent a **SIGSTOP** signal), and must be resumed by
   sending it a **SIGCONT** signal.

   This flag was *deprecated* from Linux 2.6.25 onward, and was
   *removed* altogether in Linux 2.6.38. Since then, the kernel silently
   ignores it without error. Starting with Linux 4.6, the same bit was
   reused for the **CLONE_NEWCGROUP** flag.

**CLONE_SYSVSEM** (since Linux 2.5.10)
   If **CLONE_SYSVSEM** is set, then the child and the calling process
   share a single list of System V semaphore adjustment (*semadj*)
   values (see **semop**\ (2)). In this case, the shared list
   accumulates *semadj* values across all processes sharing the list,
   and semaphore adjustments are performed only when the last process
   that is sharing the list terminates (or ceases sharing the list using
   **unshare**\ (2)). If this flag is not set, then the child has a
   separate *semadj* list that is initially empty.

**CLONE_THREAD** (since Linux 2.4.0)
   If **CLONE_THREAD** is set, the child is placed in the same thread
   group as the calling process. To make the remainder of the discussion
   of **CLONE_THREAD** more readable, the term "thread" is used to refer
   to the processes within a thread group.

   Thread groups were a feature added in Linux 2.4 to support the POSIX
   threads notion of a set of threads that share a single PID.
   Internally, this shared PID is the so-called thread group identifier
   (TGID) for the thread group. Since Linux 2.4, calls to
   **getpid**\ (2) return the TGID of the caller.

   The threads within a group can be distinguished by their
   (system-wide) unique thread IDs (TID). A new thread's TID is
   available as the function result returned to the caller, and a thread
   can obtain its own TID using **gettid**\ (2).

   When a clone call is made without specifying **CLONE_THREAD**, then
   the resulting thread is placed in a new thread group whose TGID is
   the same as the thread's TID. This thread is the *leader* of the new
   thread group.

   A new thread created with **CLONE_THREAD** has the same parent
   process as the process that made the clone call (i.e., like
   **CLONE_PARENT**), so that calls to **getppid**\ (2) return the same
   value for all of the threads in a thread group. When a
   **CLONE_THREAD** thread terminates, the thread that created it is not
   sent a **SIGCHLD** (or other termination) signal; nor can the status
   of such a thread be obtained using **wait**\ (2). (The thread is said
   to be *detached*.)

   After all of the threads in a thread group terminate the parent
   process of the thread group is sent a **SIGCHLD** (or other
   termination) signal.

   If any of the threads in a thread group performs an **execve**\ (2),
   then all threads other than the thread group leader are terminated,
   and the new program is executed in the thread group leader.

   If one of the threads in a thread group creates a child using
   **fork**\ (2), then any thread in the group can **wait**\ (2) for
   that child.

   Since Linux 2.5.35, the *flags* mask must also include
   **CLONE_SIGHAND** if **CLONE_THREAD** is specified (and note that,
   since Linux 2.6.0, **CLONE_SIGHAND** also requires **CLONE_VM** to be
   included).

   Signal dispositions and actions are process-wide: if an unhandled
   signal is delivered to a thread, then it will affect (terminate,
   stop, continue, be ignored in) all members of the thread group.

   Each thread has its own signal mask, as set by **sigprocmask**\ (2).

   A signal may be process-directed or thread-directed. A
   process-directed signal is targeted at a thread group (i.e., a TGID),
   and is delivered to an arbitrarily selected thread from among those
   that are not blocking the signal. A signal may be process-directed
   because it was generated by the kernel for reasons other than a
   hardware exception, or because it was sent using **kill**\ (2) or
   **sigqueue**\ (3). A thread-directed signal is targeted at (i.e.,
   delivered to) a specific thread. A signal may be thread directed
   because it was sent using **tgkill**\ (2) or
   **pthread_sigqueue**\ (3), or because the thread executed a machine
   language instruction that triggered a hardware exception (e.g.,
   invalid memory access triggering **SIGSEGV** or a floating-point
   exception triggering **SIGFPE**).

   A call to **sigpending**\ (2) returns a signal set that is the union
   of the pending process-directed signals and the signals that are
   pending for the calling thread.

   If a process-directed signal is delivered to a thread group, and the
   thread group has installed a handler for the signal, then the handler
   will be invoked in exactly one, arbitrarily selected member of the
   thread group that has not blocked the signal. If multiple threads in
   a group are waiting to accept the same signal using
   **sigwaitinfo**\ (2), the kernel will arbitrarily select one of these
   threads to receive the signal.

**CLONE_UNTRACED** (since Linux 2.5.46)
   If **CLONE_UNTRACED** is specified, then a tracing process cannot
   force **CLONE_PTRACE** on this child process.

**CLONE_VFORK** (since Linux 2.2)
   If **CLONE_VFORK** is set, the execution of the calling process is
   suspended until the child releases its virtual memory resources via a
   call to **execve**\ (2) or **\_exit**\ (2) (as with **vfork**\ (2)).

   If **CLONE_VFORK** is not set, then both the calling process and the
   child are schedulable after the call, and an application should not
   rely on execution occurring in any particular order.

**CLONE_VM** (since Linux 2.0)
   If **CLONE_VM** is set, the calling process and the child process run
   in the same memory space. In particular, memory writes performed by
   the calling process or by the child process are also visible in the
   other process. Moreover, any memory mapping or unmapping performed
   with **mmap**\ (2) or **munmap**\ (2) by the child or calling process
   also affects the other process.

   If **CLONE_VM** is not set, the child process runs in a separate copy
   of the memory space of the calling process at the time of the clone
   call. Memory writes or file mappings/unmappings performed by one of
   the processes do not affect the other, as with **fork**\ (2).

RETURN VALUE
============

On success, the thread ID of the child process is returned in the
caller's thread of execution. On failure, -1 is returned in the caller's
context, no child process will be created, and *errno* will be set
appropriately.

ERRORS
======

**EAGAIN**
   Too many processes are already running; see **fork**\ (2).

**EBUSY** (**clone3**\ () only)
   **CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** was specified in *cl_args.flags*, but the file
   descriptor specified in *cl_args.cgroup* refers to a version 2 cgroup
   in which a domain controller is enabled.

**EEXIST** (**clone3**\ () only)
   One (or more) of the PIDs specified in *set_tid* already exists in
   the corresponding PID namespace.

**EINVAL**
   Both **CLONE_SIGHAND** and **CLONE_CLEAR_SIGHAND** were specified in
   the *flags* mask.

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_SIGHAND** was specified in the *flags* mask, but **CLONE_VM**
   was not. (Since Linux 2.6.0.)

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_THREAD** was specified in the *flags* mask, but
   **CLONE_SIGHAND** was not. (Since Linux 2.5.35.)

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_THREAD** was specified in the *flags* mask, but the current
   process previously called **unshare**\ (2) with the **CLONE_NEWPID**
   flag or used **setns**\ (2) to reassociate itself with a PID
   namespace.

**EINVAL**
   Both **CLONE_FS** and **CLONE_NEWNS** were specified in the *flags*
   mask.

**EINVAL** (since Linux 3.9)
   Both **CLONE_NEWUSER** and **CLONE_FS** were specified in the *flags*
   mask.

**EINVAL**
   Both **CLONE_NEWIPC** and **CLONE_SYSVSEM** were specified in the
   *flags* mask.

**EINVAL**
   One (or both) of **CLONE_NEWPID** or **CLONE_NEWUSER** and one (or
   both) of **CLONE_THREAD** or **CLONE_PARENT** were specified in the
   *flags* mask.

**EINVAL** (since Linux 2.6.32)
   **CLONE_PARENT** was specified, and the caller is an init process.

**EINVAL**
   Returned by the glibc **clone**\ () wrapper function when *fn* or
   *stack* is specified as NULL.

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_NEWIPC** was specified in the *flags* mask, but the kernel
   was not configured with the **CONFIG_SYSVIPC** and **CONFIG_IPC_NS**
   options.

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_NEWNET** was specified in the *flags* mask, but the kernel
   was not configured with the **CONFIG_NET_NS** option.

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_NEWPID** was specified in the *flags* mask, but the kernel
   was not configured with the **CONFIG_PID_NS** option.

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_NEWUSER** was specified in the *flags* mask, but the kernel
   was not configured with the **CONFIG_USER_NS** option.

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_NEWUTS** was specified in the *flags* mask, but the kernel
   was not configured with the **CONFIG_UTS_NS** option.

**EINVAL**
   *stack* is not aligned to a suitable boundary for this architecture.
   For example, on aarch64, *stack* must be a multiple of 16.

**EINVAL** (**clone3**\ () only)
   **CLONE_DETACHED** was specified in the *flags* mask.

**EINVAL** (**clone**\ () only)
   **CLONE_PIDFD** was specified together with **CLONE_DETACHED** in the
   *flags* mask.

**EINVAL**
   **CLONE_PIDFD** was specified together with **CLONE_THREAD** in the
   *flags* mask.

**EINVAL**\ (**clone**\ () only)
   **CLONE_PIDFD** was specified together with **CLONE_PARENT_SETTID**
   in the *flags* mask.

**EINVAL** (**clone3**\ () only)
   *set_tid_size* is greater than the number of nested PID namespaces.

**EINVAL** (**clone3**\ () only)
   One of the PIDs specified in *set_tid* was an invalid.

**EINVAL** (AArch64 only, Linux 4.6 and earlier)
   *stack* was not aligned to a 126-bit boundary.

**ENOMEM**
   Cannot allocate sufficient memory to allocate a task structure for
   the child, or to copy those parts of the caller's context that need
   to be copied.

**ENOSPC** (since Linux 3.7)
   **CLONE_NEWPID** was specified in the *flags* mask, but the limit on
   the nesting depth of PID namespaces would have been exceeded; see
   **pid_namespaces**\ (7).

**ENOSPC** (since Linux 4.9; beforehand **EUSERS**)
   **CLONE_NEWUSER** was specified in the *flags* mask, and the call
   would cause the limit on the number of nested user namespaces to be
   exceeded. See **user_namespaces**\ (7).

   From Linux 3.11 to Linux 4.8, the error diagnosed in this case was
   **EUSERS**.

**ENOSPC** (since Linux 4.9)
   One of the values in the *flags* mask specified the creation of a new
   user namespace, but doing so would have caused the limit defined by
   the corresponding file in */proc/sys/user* to be exceeded. For
   further details, see **namespaces**\ (7).

**EOPNOTSUP** (**clone3**\ () only)
   **CLONE_INTO_CGROUP** was specified in *cl_args.flags*, but the file
   descriptor specified in *cl_args.cgroup* refers to a version 2 cgroup
   that is in the *domain invalid* state.

**EPERM**
   **CLONE_NEWCGROUP**, **CLONE_NEWIPC**, **CLONE_NEWNET**,
   **CLONE_NEWNS**, **CLONE_NEWPID**, or **CLONE_NEWUTS** was specified
   by an unprivileged process (process without **CAP_SYS_ADMIN**).

**EPERM**
   **CLONE_PID** was specified by a process other than process 0. (This
   error occurs only on Linux 2.5.15 and earlier.)

**EPERM**
   **CLONE_NEWUSER** was specified in the *flags* mask, but either the
   effective user ID or the effective group ID of the caller does not
   have a mapping in the parent namespace (see
   **user_namespaces**\ (7)).

**EPERM** (since Linux 3.9)
   **CLONE_NEWUSER** was specified in the *flags* mask and the caller is
   in a chroot environment (i.e., the caller's root directory does not
   match the root directory of the mount namespace in which it resides).

**EPERM** (**clone3**\ () only)
   *set_tid_size* was greater than zero, and the caller lacks the
   **CAP_SYS_ADMIN** capability in one or more of the user namespaces
   that own the corresponding PID namespaces.

**ERESTARTNOINTR** (since Linux 2.6.17)
   System call was interrupted by a signal and will be restarted. (This
   can be seen only during a trace.)

**EUSERS** (Linux 3.11 to Linux 4.8)
   **CLONE_NEWUSER** was specified in the *flags* mask, and the limit on
   the number of nested user namespaces would be exceeded. See the
   discussion of the **ENOSPC** error above.

VERSIONS
========

The **clone3**\ () system call first appeared in Linux 5.3.

CONFORMING TO
=============

These system calls are Linux-specific and should not be used in programs
intended to be portable.

NOTES
=====

One use of these systems calls is to implement threads: multiple flows
of control in a program that run concurrently in a shared address space.

Glibc does not provide a wrapper for **clone3**\ (); call it using
**syscall**\ (2).

Note that the glibc **clone**\ () wrapper function makes some changes in
the memory pointed to by *stack* (changes required to set the stack up
correctly for the child) *before* invoking the **clone**\ () system
call. So, in cases where **clone**\ () is used to recursively create
children, do not use the buffer employed for the parent's stack as the
stack of the child.

The **kcmp**\ (2) system call can be used to test whether two processes
share various resources such as a file descriptor table, System V
semaphore undo operations, or a virtual address space.

Handlers registered using **pthread_atfork**\ (3) are not executed
during a clone call.

In the Linux 2.4.x series, **CLONE_THREAD** generally does not make the
parent of the new thread the same as the parent of the calling process.
However, for kernel versions 2.4.7 to 2.4.18 the **CLONE_THREAD** flag
implied the **CLONE_PARENT** flag (as in Linux 2.6.0 and later).

On i386, **clone**\ () should not be called through vsyscall, but
directly through *int $0x80*.

C library/kernel differences
----------------------------

The raw **clone**\ () system call corresponds more closely to
**fork**\ (2) in that execution in the child continues from the point of
the call. As such, the *fn* and *arg* arguments of the **clone**\ ()
wrapper function are omitted.

In contrast to the glibc wrapper, the raw **clone**\ () system call
accepts NULL as a *stack* argument (and **clone3**\ () likewise allows
*cl_args.stack* to be NULL). In this case, the child uses a duplicate of
the parent's stack. (Copy-on-write semantics ensure that the child gets
separate copies of stack pages when either process modifies the stack.)
In this case, for correct operation, the **CLONE_VM** option should not
be specified. (If the child *shares* the parent's memory because of the
use of the **CLONE_VM** flag, then no copy-on-write duplication occurs
and chaos is likely to result.)

The order of the arguments also differs in the raw system call, and
there are variations in the arguments across architectures, as detailed
in the following paragraphs.

The raw system call interface on x86-64 and some other architectures
(including sh, tile, and alpha) is:

::

   long clone(unsigned long flags, void *stack,
    int *parent_tid, int *child_tid,
    unsigned long tls);

On x86-32, and several other common architectures (including score, ARM,
ARM 64, PA-RISC, arc, Power PC, xtensa, and MIPS), the order of the last
two arguments is reversed:

::

   long clone(unsigned long flags, void *stack,
    int *parent_tid, unsigned long tls,
    int *child_tid);

On the cris and s390 architectures, the order of the first two arguments
is reversed:

::

   long clone(void *stack, unsigned long flags,
    int *parent_tid, int *child_tid,
    unsigned long tls);

On the microblaze architecture, an additional argument is supplied:

::

   long clone(unsigned long flags, void *stack,
    int stack_size, /* Size of stack */
    int *parent_tid, int *child_tid,
    unsigned long tls);

blackfin, m68k, and sparc
-------------------------

The argument-passing conventions on blackfin, m68k, and sparc are
different from the descriptions above. For details, see the kernel (and
glibc) source.

ia64
----

On ia64, a different interface is used:

::

   int __clone2(int (*fn)(void *), 
    void *stack_base, size_t stack_size,
    int flags, void *arg, ... 
    /* pid_t *parent_tid, struct user_desc *tls,
    pid_t *child_tid */ );

The prototype shown above is for the glibc wrapper function; for the
system call itself, the prototype can be described as follows (it is
identical to the **clone**\ () prototype on microblaze):

::

   long clone2(unsigned long flags, void *stack_base,
    int stack_size, /* Size of stack */
    int *parent_tid, int *child_tid,
    unsigned long tls);

**\__clone2**\ () operates in the same way as **clone**\ (), except that
*stack_base* points to the lowest address of the child's stack area, and
*stack_size* specifies the size of the stack pointed to by *stack_base*.

Linux 2.4 and earlier
---------------------

In Linux 2.4 and earlier, **clone**\ () does not take arguments
*parent_tid*, *tls*, and *child_tid*.

BUGS
====

GNU C library versions 2.3.4 up to and including 2.24 contained a
wrapper function for **getpid**\ (2) that performed caching of PIDs.
This caching relied on support in the glibc wrapper for **clone**\ (),
but limitations in the implementation meant that the cache was not up to
date in some circumstances. In particular, if a signal was delivered to
the child immediately after the **clone**\ () call, then a call to
**getpid**\ (2) in a handler for the signal could return the PID of the
calling process ("the parent"), if the clone wrapper had not yet had a
chance to update the PID cache in the child. (This discussion ignores
the case where the child was created using **CLONE_THREAD**, when
**getpid**\ (2) *should* return the same value in the child and in the
process that called **clone**\ (), since the caller and the child are in
the same thread group. The stale-cache problem also does not occur if
the *flags* argument includes **CLONE_VM**.) To get the truth, it was
sometimes necessary to use code such as the following:

::

   #include <syscall.h>

   pid_t mypid;

   mypid = syscall(SYS_getpid);

Because of the stale-cache problem, as well as other problems noted in
**getpid**\ (2), the PID caching feature was removed in glibc 2.25.

EXAMPLES
========

The following program demonstrates the use of **clone**\ () to create a
child process that executes in a separate UTS namespace. The child
changes the hostname in its UTS namespace. Both parent and child then
display the system hostname, making it possible to see that the hostname
differs in the UTS namespaces of the parent and child. For an example of
the use of this program, see **setns**\ (2).

Within the sample program, we allocate the memory that is to be used for
the child's stack using **mmap**\ (2) rather than **malloc**\ (3) for
the following reasons:

-  **mmap**\ (2) allocates a block of memory that starts on a page
   boundary and is a multiple of the page size. This is useful if we
   want to establish a guard page (a page with protection **PROT_NONE**)
   at the end of the stack using **mprotect**\ (2).

-  We can specify the **MAP_STACK** flag to request a mapping that is
   suitable for a stack. For the moment, this flag is a no-op on Linux,
   but it exists and has effect on some other systems, so we should
   include it for portability.

Program source
--------------

::

   #define _GNU_SOURCE
   #include <sys/wait.h>
   #include <sys/utsname.h>
   #include <sched.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <sys/mman.h>

   #define errExit(msg)    do { perror(msg); exit(EXIT_FAILURE); \
                           } while (0)

   static int              /* Start function for cloned child */
   childFunc(void *arg)
   {
       struct utsname uts;

       /* Change hostname in UTS namespace of child */

       if (sethostname(arg, strlen(arg)) == -1)
           errExit("sethostname");

       /* Retrieve and display hostname */

       if (uname(&uts) == -1)
           errExit("uname");
       printf("uts.nodename in child:  %s\n", uts.nodename);

       /* Keep the namespace open for a while, by sleeping.
          This allows some experimentation--for example, another
          process might join the namespace. */

       sleep(200);

       return 0;           /* Child terminates now */
   }

   #define STACK_SIZE (1024 * 1024)    /* Stack size for cloned child */

   int
   main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       char *stack;                    /* Start of stack buffer */
       char *stackTop;                 /* End of stack buffer */
       pid_t pid;
       struct utsname uts;

       if (argc < 2) {
           fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s <child-hostname>\n", argv[0]);
           exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
       }

       /* Allocate memory to be used for the stack of the child */

       stack = mmap(NULL, STACK_SIZE, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
                    MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_STACK, -1, 0);
       if (stack == MAP_FAILED)
           errExit("mmap");

       stackTop = stack + STACK_SIZE;  /* Assume stack grows downward */

       /* Create child that has its own UTS namespace;
          child commences execution in childFunc() */

       pid = clone(childFunc, stackTop, CLONE_NEWUTS | SIGCHLD, argv[1]);
       if (pid == -1)
           errExit("clone");
       printf("clone() returned %ld\n", (long) pid);

       /* Parent falls through to here */

       sleep(1);           /* Give child time to change its hostname */

       /* Display hostname in parent's UTS namespace. This will be
          different from hostname in child's UTS namespace. */

       if (uname(&uts) == -1)
           errExit("uname");
       printf("uts.nodename in parent: %s\n", uts.nodename);

       if (waitpid(pid, NULL, 0) == -1)    /* Wait for child */
           errExit("waitpid");
       printf("child has terminated\n");

       exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   }

SEE ALSO
========

**fork**\ (2), **futex**\ (2), **getpid**\ (2), **gettid**\ (2),
**kcmp**\ (2), **mmap**\ (2), **pidfd_open**\ (2),
**set_thread_area**\ (2), **set_tid_address**\ (2), **setns**\ (2),
**tkill**\ (2), **unshare**\ (2), **wait**\ (2), **capabilities**\ (7),
**namespaces**\ (7), **pthreads**\ (7)
