NAME
====

fanotify_mark - add, remove, or modify an fanotify mark on a filesystem
object

SYNOPSIS
========

::

   #include <sys/fanotify.h>

   int fanotify_mark(int fanotify_fd, unsigned int flags,
    uint64_t mask, int dirfd",constchar*"pathname);

DESCRIPTION
===========

For an overview of the fanotify API, see **fanotify**\ (7).

**fanotify_mark**\ () adds, removes, or modifies an fanotify mark on a
filesystem object. The caller must have read permission on the
filesystem object that is to be marked.

The *fanotify_fd* argument is a file descriptor returned by
**fanotify_init**\ (2).

*flags* is a bit mask describing the modification to perform. It must
include exactly one of the following values:

**FAN_MARK_ADD**
   The events in *mask* will be added to the mark mask (or to the ignore
   mask). *mask* must be nonempty or the error **EINVAL** will occur.

**FAN_MARK_REMOVE**
   The events in argument *mask* will be removed from the mark mask (or
   from the ignore mask). *mask* must be nonempty or the error
   **EINVAL** will occur.

**FAN_MARK_FLUSH**
   Remove either all marks for filesystems, all marks for mounts, or all
   marks for directories and files from the fanotify group. If *flags*
   contains **FAN_MARK_MOUNT**, all marks for mounts are removed from
   the group. If *flags* contains **FAN_MARK_FILESYSTEM**, all marks for
   filesystems are removed from the group. Otherwise, all marks for
   directories and files are removed. No flag other than and at most one
   of the flags **FAN_MARK_MOUNT** or **FAN_MARK_FILESYSTEM** can be
   used in conjunction with **FAN_MARK_FLUSH**. *mask* is ignored.

If none of the values above is specified, or more than one is specified,
the call fails with the error **EINVAL**.

In addition, zero or more of the following values may be ORed into
*flags*:

**FAN_MARK_DONT_FOLLOW**
   If *pathname* is a symbolic link, mark the link itself, rather than
   the file to which it refers. (By default, **fanotify_mark**\ ()
   dereferences *pathname* if it is a symbolic link.)

**FAN_MARK_ONLYDIR**
   If the filesystem object to be marked is not a directory, the error
   **ENOTDIR** shall be raised.

**FAN_MARK_MOUNT**
   Mark the mount point specified by *pathname*. If *pathname* is not
   itself a mount point, the mount point containing *pathname* will be
   marked. All directories, subdirectories, and the contained files of
   the mount point will be monitored. The events which require the
   *fanotify_fd* file descriptor to have been initialized with the flag
   **FAN_REPORT_FID**, such as **FAN_CREATE**, **FAN_ATTRIB**,
   **FAN_MOVE**, and **FAN_DELETE_SELF**, cannot be provided as a *mask*
   when *flags* contains **FAN_MARK_MOUNT**. Attempting to do so will
   result in the error **EINVAL** being returned.

**FAN_MARK_FILESYSTEM** (since Linux 4.20)
   Mark the filesystem specified by *pathname*. The filesystem
   containing *pathname* will be marked. All the contained files and
   directories of the filesystem from any mount point will be monitored.

**FAN_MARK_IGNORED_MASK**
   The events in *mask* shall be added to or removed from the ignore
   mask.

**FAN_MARK_IGNORED_SURV_MODIFY**
   The ignore mask shall survive modify events. If this flag is not set,
   the ignore mask is cleared when a modify event occurs for the ignored
   file or directory.

*mask* defines which events shall be listened for (or which shall be
ignored). It is a bit mask composed of the following values:

**FAN_ACCESS**
   Create an event when a file or directory (but see BUGS) is accessed
   (read).

**FAN_MODIFY**
   Create an event when a file is modified (write).

**FAN_CLOSE_WRITE**
   Create an event when a writable file is closed.

**FAN_CLOSE_NOWRITE**
   Create an event when a read-only file or directory is closed.

**FAN_OPEN**
   Create an event when a file or directory is opened.

**FAN_OPEN_EXEC** (since Linux 5.0)
   Create an event when a file is opened with the intent to be executed.
   See NOTES for additional details.

**FAN_ATTRIB** (since Linux 5.1)
   Create an event when the metadata for a file or directory has
   changed. An fanotify file descriptor created with **FAN_REPORT_FID**
   is required.

**FAN_CREATE** (since Linux 5.1)
   Create an event when a file or directory has been created in a marked
   parent directory. An fanotify file descriptor created with
   **FAN_REPORT_FID** is required.

**FAN_DELETE** (since Linux 5.1)
   Create an event when a file or directory has been deleted in a marked
   parent directory. An fanotify file descriptor created with
   **FAN_REPORT_FID** is required.

**FAN_DELETE_SELF** (since Linux 5.1)
   Create an event when a marked file or directory itself is deleted. An
   fanotify file descriptor created with **FAN_REPORT_FID** is required.

**FAN_MOVED_FROM** (since Linux 5.1)
   Create an event when a file or directory has been moved from a marked
   parent directory. An fanotify file descriptor created with
   **FAN_REPORT_FID** is required.

**FAN_MOVED_TO** (since Linux 5.1)
   Create an event when a file or directory has been moved to a marked
   parent directory. An fanotify file descriptor created with
   **FAN_REPORT_FID** is required.

**FAN_MOVE_SELF** (since Linux 5.1)
   Create an event when a marked file or directory itself has been
   moved. An fanotify file descriptor created with **FAN_REPORT_FID** is
   required.

**FAN_OPEN_PERM**
   Create an event when a permission to open a file or directory is
   requested. An fanotify file descriptor created with
   **FAN_CLASS_PRE_CONTENT** or **FAN_CLASS_CONTENT** is required.

**FAN_OPEN_EXEC_PERM** (since Linux 5.0)
   Create an event when a permission to open a file for execution is
   requested. An fanotify file descriptor created with
   **FAN_CLASS_PRE_CONTENT** or **FAN_CLASS_CONTENT** is required. See
   NOTES for additional details.

**FAN_ACCESS_PERM**
   Create an event when a permission to read a file or directory is
   requested. An fanotify file descriptor created with
   **FAN_CLASS_PRE_CONTENT** or **FAN_CLASS_CONTENT** is required.

**FAN_ONDIR**
   Create events for directoriesâ€”for example, when **opendir**\ (3),
   **readdir**\ (3) (but see BUGS), and **closedir**\ (3) are called.
   Without this flag, events are created only for files. In the context
   of directory entry events, such as **FAN_CREATE**, **FAN_DELETE**,
   **FAN_MOVED_FROM**, and **FAN_MOVED_TO**, specifying the flag
   **FAN_ONDIR** is required in order to create events when subdirectory
   entries are modified (i.e., **mkdir**\ (2)/ **rmdir**\ (2)).

**FAN_EVENT_ON_CHILD**
   Events for the immediate children of marked directories shall be
   created. The flag has no effect when marking mounts and filesystems.
   Note that events are not generated for children of the subdirectories
   of marked directories. More specifically, the directory entry
   modification events **FAN_CREATE**, **FAN_DELETE**,
   **FAN_MOVED_FROM**, and **FAN_MOVED_TO** are not generated for any
   entry modifications performed inside subdirectories of marked
   directories. Note that the events **FAN_DELETE_SELF** and
   **FAN_MOVE_SELF** are not generated for children of marked
   directories. To monitor complete directory trees it is necessary to
   mark the relevant mount or filesystem.

The following composed values are defined:

**FAN_CLOSE**
   A file is closed (**FAN_CLOSE_WRITE**\ \|\ **FAN_CLOSE_NOWRITE**).

**FAN_MOVE**
   A file or directory has been moved
   (**FAN_MOVED_FROM**\ \|\ **FAN_MOVED_TO**).

The filesystem object to be marked is determined by the file descriptor
*dirfd* and the pathname specified in *pathname*:

-  If *pathname* is NULL, *dirfd* defines the filesystem object to be
   marked.

-  If *pathname* is NULL, and *dirfd* takes the special value
   **AT_FDCWD**, the current working directory is to be marked.

-  If *pathname* is absolute, it defines the filesystem object to be
   marked, and *dirfd* is ignored.

-  If *pathname* is relative, and *dirfd* does not have the value
   **AT_FDCWD**, then the filesystem object to be marked is determined
   by interpreting *pathname* relative the directory referred to by
   *dirfd*.

-  If *pathname* is relative, and *dirfd* has the value **AT_FDCWD**,
   then the filesystem object to be marked is determined by interpreting
   *pathname* relative the current working directory.

RETURN VALUE
============

On success, **fanotify_mark**\ () returns 0. On error, -1 is returned,
and *errno* is set to indicate the error.

ERRORS
======

**EBADF**
   An invalid file descriptor was passed in *fanotify_fd*.

**EINVAL**
   An invalid value was passed in *flags* or *mask*, or *fanotify_fd*
   was not an fanotify file descriptor.

**EINVAL**
   The fanotify file descriptor was opened with **FAN_CLASS_NOTIF** or
   **FAN_REPORT_FID** and mask contains a flag for permission events
   (**FAN_OPEN_PERM** or **FAN_ACCESS_PERM**).

**ENODEV**
   The filesystem object indicated by *pathname* is not associated with
   a filesystem that supports *fsid* (e.g., **tmpfs**\ (5)). This error
   can be returned only when an fanotify file descriptor returned by
   **fanotify_init**\ (2) has been created with **FAN_REPORT_FID**.

**ENOENT**
   The filesystem object indicated by *dirfd* and *pathname* does not
   exist. This error also occurs when trying to remove a mark from an
   object which is not marked.

**ENOMEM**
   The necessary memory could not be allocated.

**ENOSPC**
   The number of marks exceeds the limit of 8192 and the
   **FAN_UNLIMITED_MARKS** flag was not specified when the fanotify file
   descriptor was created with **fanotify_init**\ (2).

**ENOSYS**
   This kernel does not implement **fanotify_mark**\ (). The fanotify
   API is available only if the kernel was configured with
   **CONFIG_FANOTIFY**.

**ENOTDIR**
   *flags* contains **FAN_MARK_ONLYDIR**, and *dirfd* and *pathname* do
   not specify a directory.

**EOPNOTSUPP**
   The object indicated by *pathname* is associated with a filesystem
   that does not support the encoding of file handles. This error can be
   returned only when an fanotify file descriptor returned by
   **fanotify_init**\ (2) has been created with **FAN_REPORT_FID**.

**EXDEV**
   The filesystem object indicated by *pathname* resides within a
   filesystem subvolume (e.g., **btrfs**\ (5)) which uses a different
   *fsid* than its root superblock. This error can be returned only when
   an fanotify file descriptor returned by **fanotify_init**\ (2) has
   been created with **FAN_REPORT_FID**.

VERSIONS
========

**fanotify_mark**\ () was introduced in version 2.6.36 of the Linux
kernel and enabled in version 2.6.37.

CONFORMING TO
=============

This system call is Linux-specific.

NOTES
=====

FAN_OPEN_EXEC and FAN_OPEN_EXEC_PERM
------------------------------------

When using either **FAN_OPEN_EXEC** or **FAN_OPEN_EXEC_PERM** within the
*mask*, events of these types will be returned only when the direct
execution of a program occurs. More specifically, this means that events
of these types will be generated for files that are opened using
**execve**\ (2), **execveat**\ (2), or **uselib**\ (2). Events of these
types will not be raised in the situation where an interpreter is passed
(or reads) a file for interpretation.

Additionally, if a mark has also been placed on the Linux dynamic
linker, a user should also expect to receive an event for it when an ELF
object has been successfully opened using **execve**\ (2) or
**execveat**\ (2).

For example, if the following ELF binary were to be invoked and a
**FAN_OPEN_EXEC** mark has been placed on /:

::

   $ /bin/echo foo

The listening application in this case would receive **FAN_OPEN_EXEC**
events for both the ELF binary and interpreter, respectively:

::

   /bin/echo
   /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2

BUGS
====

The following bugs were present in Linux kernels before version 3.16:

-  If *flags* contains **FAN_MARK_FLUSH**, *dirfd* and *pathname* must
   specify a valid filesystem object, even though this object is not
   used.

-  **readdir**\ (2) does not generate a **FAN_ACCESS** event.

-  If **fanotify_mark**\ () is called with **FAN_MARK_FLUSH**, *flags*
   is not checked for invalid values.

SEE ALSO
========

**fanotify_init**\ (2), **fanotify**\ (7)
