NAME
====

getrandom - obtain a series of random bytes

SYNOPSIS
========

**#include <sys/random.h>**

**ssize_t getrandom(void \***\ *buf*\ **, size_t**\ *buflen*\ **,
unsigned int**\ *flags*\ **);**

DESCRIPTION
===========

The **getrandom**\ () system call fills the buffer pointed to by *buf*
with up to *buflen* random bytes. These bytes can be used to seed
user-space random number generators or for cryptographic purposes.

By default, **getrandom**\ () draws entropy from the *urandom* source
(i.e., the same source as the */dev/urandom* device). This behavior can
be changed via the *flags* argument.

If the *urandom* source has been initialized, reads of up to 256 bytes
will always return as many bytes as requested and will not be
interrupted by signals. No such guarantees apply for larger buffer
sizes. For example, if the call is interrupted by a signal handler, it
may return a partially filled buffer, or fail with the error **EINTR**.

If the *urandom* source has not yet been initialized, then
**getrandom**\ () will block, unless **GRND_NONBLOCK** is specified in
*flags*.

The *flags* argument is a bit mask that can contain zero or more of the
following values ORed together:

**GRND_RANDOM**
   If this bit is set, then random bytes are drawn from the *random*
   source (i.e., the same source as the */dev/random* device) instead of
   the *urandom* source. The *random* source is limited based on the
   entropy that can be obtained from environmental noise. If the number
   of available bytes in the *random* source is less than requested in
   *buflen*, the call returns just the available random bytes. If no
   random bytes are available, the behavior depends on the presence of
   **GRND_NONBLOCK** in the *flags* argument.

**GRND_NONBLOCK**
   By default, when reading from the *random* source, **getrandom**\ ()
   blocks if no random bytes are available, and when reading from the
   *urandom* source, it blocks if the entropy pool has not yet been
   initialized. If the **GRND_NONBLOCK** flag is set, then
   **getrandom**\ () does not block in these cases, but instead
   immediately returns -1 with *errno* set to **EAGAIN**.

RETURN VALUE
============

On success, **getrandom**\ () returns the number of bytes that were
copied to the buffer *buf*. This may be less than the number of bytes
requested via *buflen* if either **GRND_RANDOM** was specified in
*flags* and insufficient entropy was present in the *random* source or
the system call was interrupted by a signal.

On error, -1 is returned, and *errno* is set appropriately.

ERRORS
======

**EAGAIN**
   The requested entropy was not available, and **getrandom**\ () would
   have blocked if the **GRND_NONBLOCK** flag was not set.

**EFAULT**
   The address referred to by *buf* is outside the accessible address
   space.

**EINTR**
   The call was interrupted by a signal handler; see the description of
   how interrupted **read**\ (2) calls on "slow" devices are handled
   with and without the **SA_RESTART** flag in the **signal**\ (7) man
   page.

**EINVAL**
   An invalid flag was specified in *flags*.

**ENOSYS**
   The glibc wrapper function for **getrandom**\ () determined that the
   underlying kernel does not implement this system call.

VERSIONS
========

**getrandom**\ () was introduced in version 3.17 of the Linux kernel.
Support was added to glibc in version 2.25.

CONFORMING TO
=============

This system call is Linux-specific.

NOTES
=====

For an overview and comparison of the various interfaces that can be
used to obtain randomness, see **random**\ (7).

Unlike */dev/random* and */dev/urandom*, **getrandom**\ () does not
involve the use of pathnames or file descriptors. Thus,
**getrandom**\ () can be useful in cases where **chroot**\ (2) makes
*/dev* pathnames invisible, and where an application (e.g., a daemon
during start-up) closes a file descriptor for one of these files that
was opened by a library.

Maximum number of bytes returned
--------------------------------

As of Linux 3.19 the following limits apply:

-  When reading from the *urandom* source, a maximum of 33554431 bytes
   is returned by a single call to **getrandom**\ () on systems where
   *int* has a size of 32 bits.

-  When reading from the *random* source, a maximum of 512 bytes is
   returned.

Interruption by a signal handler
--------------------------------

When reading from the *urandom* source (**GRND_RANDOM** is not set),
**getrandom**\ () will block until the entropy pool has been initialized
(unless the **GRND_NONBLOCK** flag was specified). If a request is made
to read a large number of bytes (more than 256), **getrandom**\ () will
block until those bytes have been generated and transferred from kernel
memory to *buf*. When reading from the *random* source (**GRND_RANDOM**
is set), **getrandom**\ () will block until some random bytes become
available (unless the **GRND_NONBLOCK** flag was specified).

The behavior when a call to **getrandom**\ () that is blocked while
reading from the *urandom* source is interrupted by a signal handler
depends on the initialization state of the entropy buffer and on the
request size, *buflen*. If the entropy is not yet initialized, then the
call fails with the **EINTR** error. If the entropy pool has been
initialized and the request size is large (*buflen* > 256), the call
either succeeds, returning a partially filled buffer, or fails with the
error **EINTR**. If the entropy pool has been initialized and the
request size is small (*buflen* <= 256), then **getrandom**\ () will not
fail with **EINTR**. Instead, it will return all of the bytes that have
been requested.

When reading from the *random* source, blocking requests of any size can
be interrupted by a signal handler (the call fails with the error
**EINTR**).

Using **getrandom**\ () to read small buffers (<= 256 bytes) from the
*urandom* source is the preferred mode of usage.

The special treatment of small values of *buflen* was designed for
compatibility with OpenBSD's **getentropy**\ (3), which is nowadays
supported by glibc.

The user of **getrandom**\ () *must* always check the return value, to
determine whether either an error occurred or fewer bytes than requested
were returned. In the case where **GRND_RANDOM** is not specified and
*buflen* is less than or equal to 256, a return of fewer bytes than
requested should never happen, but the careful programmer will check for
this anyway!

BUGS
====

As of Linux 3.19, the following bug exists:

-  Depending on CPU load, **getrandom**\ () does not react to interrupts
   before reading all bytes requested.

SEE ALSO
========

**getentropy**\ (3), **random**\ (4), **urandom**\ (4), **random**\ (7),
**signal**\ (7)
