NAME
====

pidfd_send_signal - send a signal to a process specified by a file
descriptor

SYNOPSIS
========

::

   #include <signal.h>

   int pidfd_send_signal(int pidfd, int sig, siginfo_t *info,
    unsigned int flags);

DESCRIPTION
===========

The **pidfd_send_signal**\ () system call sends the signal *sig* to the
target process referred to by *pidfd*, a PID file descriptor that refers
to a process.

If the *info* argument points to a *siginfo_t* buffer, that buffer
should be populated as described in **rt_sigqueueinfo**\ (2).

If the *info* argument is a NULL pointer, this is equivalent to
specifying a pointer to a *siginfo_t* buffer whose fields match the
values that are implicitly supplied when a signal is sent using
**kill**\ (2):

-  *si_signo* is set to the signal number;

-  *si_errno* is set to 0;

-  *si_code* is set to **SI_USER;**

-  *si_pid* is set to the caller's PID; and

-  *si_uid* is set to the caller's real user ID.

The calling process must either be in the same PID namespace as the
process referred to by *pidfd*, or be in an ancestor of that namespace.

The *flags* argument is reserved for future use; currently, this
argument must be specified as 0.

RETURN VALUE
============

On success, **pidfd_send_signal**\ () returns 0. On error, -1 is
returned and *errno* is set to indicate the cause of the error.

ERRORS
======

**EBADF**
   *pidfd* is not a valid PID file descriptor.

**EINVAL**
   *sig* is not a valid signal.

**EINVAL**
   The calling process is not in a PID namespace from which it can send
   a signal to the target process.

**EINVAL**
   *flags* is not 0.

**EPERM**
   The calling process does not have permission to send the signal to
   the target process.

**EPERM**
   *pidfd* doesn't refer to the calling process, and *info.si_code* is
   invalid (see **rt_sigqueueinfo**\ (2)).

**ESRCH**
   The target process does not exist (i.e., it has terminated and been
   waited on).

VERSIONS
========

**pidfd_send_signal**\ () first appeared in Linux 5.1.

CONFORMING TO
=============

**pidfd_send_signal**\ () is Linux specific.

NOTES
=====

Currently, there is no glibc wrapper for this system call; call it using
**syscall**\ (2).

PID file descriptors
--------------------

The *pidfd* argument is a PID file descriptor, a file descriptor that
refers to process. Such a file descriptor can be obtained in any of the
following ways:

-  by opening a */proc/[pid]* directory;

-  using **pidfd_open**\ (2); or

-  via the PID file descriptor that is returned by a call to
   **clone**\ (2) or **clone3**\ (2) that specifies the **CLONE_PIDFD**
   flag.

The **pidfd_send_signal**\ () system call allows the avoidance of race
conditions that occur when using traditional interfaces (such as
**kill**\ (2)) to signal a process. The problem is that the traditional
interfaces specify the target process via a process ID (PID), with the
result that the sender may accidentally send a signal to the wrong
process if the originally intended target process has terminated and its
PID has been recycled for another process. By contrast, a PID file
descriptor is a stable reference to a specific process; if that process
terminates, **pidfd_send_signal**\ () fails with the error **ESRCH**.

EXAMPLES
========

::

   #define _GNU_SOURCE
   #include <limits.h>
   #include <signal.h>
   #include <fcntl.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <sys/syscall.h>

   #ifndef __NR_pidfd_send_signal
   #define __NR_pidfd_send_signal 424
   #endif

   static int
   pidfd_send_signal(int pidfd, int sig, siginfo_t *info,
           unsigned int flags)
   {
       return syscall(__NR_pidfd_send_signal, pidfd, sig, info, flags);
   }

   int
   main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       siginfo_t info;
       char path[PATH_MAX];
       int pidfd, sig;

       if (argc != 3) {
           fprintf(stderr, "Usage: %s <pid> <signal>\n", argv[0]);
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       sig = atoi(argv[2]);

       /* Obtain a PID file descriptor by opening the /proc/PID directory
          of the target process */

       snprintf(path, sizeof(path), "/proc/%s", argv[1]);

       pidfd = open(path, O_RDONLY);
       if (pidfd == -1) {
           perror("open");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /* Populate a 'siginfo_t' structure for use with
          pidfd_send_signal() */

       memset(&info, 0, sizeof(info));
       info.si_code = SI_QUEUE;
       info.si_signo = sig;
       info.si_errno = 0;
       info.si_uid = getuid();
       info.si_pid = getpid();
       info.si_value.sival_int = 1234;

       /* Send the signal */

       if (pidfd_send_signal(pidfd, sig, &info, 0) == -1) {
           perror("pidfd_send_signal");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   }

SEE ALSO
========

**clone**\ (2), **kill**\ (2), **pidfd_open**\ (2),
**rt_sigqueueinfo**\ (2), **sigaction**\ (2), **pid_namespaces**\ (7),
**signal**\ (7)
