NAME
====

seccomp - operate on Secure Computing state of the process

SYNOPSIS
========

::

   #include <linux/seccomp.h>
   #include <linux/filter.h>
   #include <linux/audit.h>
   #include <linux/signal.h>
   #include <sys/ptrace.h>

   int seccomp(unsigned int operation, unsigned int flags",void*"args);

DESCRIPTION
===========

The **seccomp**\ () system call operates on the Secure Computing
(seccomp) state of the calling process.

Currently, Linux supports the following *operation* values:

**SECCOMP_SET_MODE_STRICT**
   The only system calls that the calling thread is permitted to make
   are **read**\ (2), **write**\ (2), **\_exit**\ (2) (but not
   **exit_group**\ (2)), and **sigreturn**\ (2). Other system calls
   result in the delivery of a **SIGKILL** signal. Strict secure
   computing mode is useful for number-crunching applications that may
   need to execute untrusted byte code, perhaps obtained by reading from
   a pipe or socket.

   Note that although the calling thread can no longer call
   **sigprocmask**\ (2), it can use **sigreturn**\ (2) to block all
   signals apart from **SIGKILL** and **SIGSTOP**. This means that
   **alarm**\ (2) (for example) is not sufficient for restricting the
   process's execution time. Instead, to reliably terminate the process,
   **SIGKILL** must be used. This can be done by using
   **timer_create**\ (2) with **SIGEV_SIGNAL** and *sigev_signo* set to
   **SIGKILL**, or by using **setrlimit**\ (2) to set the hard limit for
   **RLIMIT_CPU**.

   This operation is available only if the kernel is configured with
   **CONFIG_SECCOMP** enabled.

   The value of *flags* must be 0, and *args* must be NULL.

   This operation is functionally identical to the call:

   ::

      prctl(PR_SET_SECCOMP, SECCOMP_MODE_STRICT);

**SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER**
   The system calls allowed are defined by a pointer to a Berkeley
   Packet Filter (BPF) passed via *args*. This argument is a pointer to
   a *struct sock_fprog*; it can be designed to filter arbitrary system
   calls and system call arguments. If the filter is invalid,
   **seccomp**\ () fails, returning **EINVAL** in *errno*.

   If **fork**\ (2) or **clone**\ (2) is allowed by the filter, any
   child processes will be constrained to the same system call filters
   as the parent. If **execve**\ (2) is allowed, the existing filters
   will be preserved across a call to **execve**\ (2).

   In order to use the **SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER** operation, either the
   calling thread must have the **CAP_SYS_ADMIN** capability in its user
   namespace, or the thread must already have the *no_new_privs* bit
   set. If that bit was not already set by an ancestor of this thread,
   the thread must make the following call:

   ::

      prctl(PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS, 1);

   Otherwise, the **SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER** operation fails and
   returns **EACCES** in *errno*. This requirement ensures that an
   unprivileged process cannot apply a malicious filter and then invoke
   a set-user-ID or other privileged program using **execve**\ (2), thus
   potentially compromising that program. (Such a malicious filter
   might, for example, cause an attempt to use **setuid**\ (2) to set
   the caller's user IDs to nonzero values to instead return 0 without
   actually making the system call. Thus, the program might be tricked
   into retaining superuser privileges in circumstances where it is
   possible to influence it to do dangerous things because it did not
   actually drop privileges.)

   If **prctl**\ (2) or **seccomp**\ () is allowed by the attached
   filter, further filters may be added. This will increase evaluation
   time, but allows for further reduction of the attack surface during
   execution of a thread.

   The **SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER** operation is available only if the
   kernel is configured with **CONFIG_SECCOMP_FILTER** enabled.

   When *flags* is 0, this operation is functionally identical to the
   call:

   ::

      prctl(PR_SET_SECCOMP, SECCOMP_MODE_FILTER, args);

   The recognized *flags* are:

   **SECCOMP_FILTER_FLAG_TSYNC**
      When adding a new filter, synchronize all other threads of the
      calling process to the same seccomp filter tree. A "filter tree"
      is the ordered list of filters attached to a thread. (Attaching
      identical filters in separate **seccomp**\ () calls results in
      different filters from this perspective.)

      If any thread cannot synchronize to the same filter tree, the call
      will not attach the new seccomp filter, and will fail, returning
      the first thread ID found that cannot synchronize. Synchronization
      will fail if another thread in the same process is in
      **SECCOMP_MODE_STRICT** or if it has attached new seccomp filters
      to itself, diverging from the calling thread's filter tree.

   **SECCOMP_FILTER_FLAG_LOG** (since Linux 4.14)
      All filter return actions except **SECCOMP_RET_ALLOW** should be
      logged. An administrator may override this filter flag by
      preventing specific actions from being logged via the
      */proc/sys/kernel/seccomp/actions_logged* file.

   **SECCOMP_FILTER_FLAG_SPEC_ALLOW** (since Linux 4.17)
      Disable Speculative Store Bypass mitigation.

**SECCOMP_GET_ACTION_AVAIL** (since Linux 4.14)
   Test to see if an action is supported by the kernel. This operation
   is helpful to confirm that the kernel knows of a more recently added
   filter return action since the kernel treats all unknown actions as
   **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_PROCESS**.

   The value of *flags* must be 0, and *args* must be a pointer to an
   unsigned 32-bit filter return action.

Filters
-------

When adding filters via **SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER**, *args* points to a
filter program:

::

   struct sock_fprog {
       unsigned short      len;    /* Number of BPF instructions */
       struct sock_filter *filter; /* Pointer to array of
                                      BPF instructions */
   };

Each program must contain one or more BPF instructions:

::

   struct sock_filter {            /* Filter block */
       __u16 code;                 /* Actual filter code */
       __u8  jt;                   /* Jump true */
       __u8  jf;                   /* Jump false */
       __u32 k;                    /* Generic multiuse field */
   };

When executing the instructions, the BPF program operates on the system
call information made available (i.e., use the **BPF_ABS** addressing
mode) as a (read-only) buffer of the following form:

::

   struct seccomp_data {
       int   nr;                   /* System call number */
       __u32 arch;                 /* AUDIT_ARCH_* value
                                      (see <linux/audit.h>) */
       __u64 instruction_pointer;  /* CPU instruction pointer */
       __u64 args[6];              /* Up to 6 system call arguments */
   };

Because numbering of system calls varies between architectures and some
architectures (e.g., x86-64) allow user-space code to use the calling
conventions of multiple architectures (and the convention being used may
vary over the life of a process that uses **execve**\ (2) to execute
binaries that employ the different conventions), it is usually necessary
to verify the value of the *arch* field.

It is strongly recommended to use an allow-list approach whenever
possible because such an approach is more robust and simple. A deny-list
will have to be updated whenever a potentially dangerous system call is
added (or a dangerous flag or option if those are deny-listed), and it
is often possible to alter the representation of a value without
altering its meaning, leading to a deny-list bypass. See also *Caveats*
below.

The *arch* field is not unique for all calling conventions. The x86-64
ABI and the x32 ABI both use **AUDIT_ARCH_X86_64** as *arch*, and they
run on the same processors. Instead, the mask **\__X32_SYSCALL_BIT** is
used on the system call number to tell the two ABIs apart.

This means that in order to create a seccomp-based deny-list for system
calls performed through the x86-64 ABI, it is necessary to not only
check that *arch* equals **AUDIT_ARCH_X86_64**, but also to explicitly
reject all system calls that contain **\__X32_SYSCALL_BIT** in *nr*.

The *instruction_pointer* field provides the address of the
machine-language instruction that performed the system call. This might
be useful in conjunction with the use of */proc/[pid]/maps* to perform
checks based on which region (mapping) of the program made the system
call. (Probably, it is wise to lock down the **mmap**\ (2) and
**mprotect**\ (2) system calls to prevent the program from subverting
such checks.)

When checking values from *args* against a deny-list, keep in mind that
arguments are often silently truncated before being processed, but after
the seccomp check. For example, this happens if the i386 ABI is used on
an x86-64 kernel: although the kernel will normally not look beyond the
32 lowest bits of the arguments, the values of the full 64-bit registers
will be present in the seccomp data. A less surprising example is that
if the x86-64 ABI is used to perform a system call that takes an
argument of type *int*, the more-significant half of the argument
register is ignored by the system call, but visible in the seccomp data.

A seccomp filter returns a 32-bit value consisting of two parts: the
most significant 16 bits (corresponding to the mask defined by the
constant **SECCOMP_RET_ACTION_FULL**) contain one of the "action" values
listed below; the least significant 16-bits (defined by the constant
**SECCOMP_RET_DATA**) are "data" to be associated with this return
value.

If multiple filters exist, they are *all* executed, in reverse order of
their addition to the filter treeâ€”that is, the most recently installed
filter is executed first. (Note that all filters will be called even if
one of the earlier filters returns **SECCOMP_RET_KILL**. This is done to
simplify the kernel code and to provide a tiny speed-up in the execution
of sets of filters by avoiding a check for this uncommon case.) The
return value for the evaluation of a given system call is the first-seen
action value of highest precedence (along with its accompanying data)
returned by execution of all of the filters.

In decreasing order of precedence, the action values that may be
returned by a seccomp filter are:

**SECCOMP_RET_KILL_PROCESS** (since Linux 4.14)
   This value results in immediate termination of the process, with a
   core dump. The system call is not executed. By contrast with
   **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_THREAD** below, all threads in the thread group
   are terminated. (For a discussion of thread groups, see the
   description of the **CLONE_THREAD** flag in **clone**\ (2).)

   The process terminates *as though* killed by a **SIGSYS** signal.
   Even if a signal handler has been registered for **SIGSYS**, the
   handler will be ignored in this case and the process always
   terminates. To a parent process that is waiting on this process
   (using **waitpid**\ (2) or similar), the returned *wstatus* will
   indicate that its child was terminated as though by a **SIGSYS**
   signal.

**SECCOMP_RET_KILL_THREAD** (or **SECCOMP_RET_KILL**)
   This value results in immediate termination of the thread that made
   the system call. The system call is not executed. Other threads in
   the same thread group will continue to execute.

   The thread terminates *as though* killed by a **SIGSYS** signal. See
   **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_PROCESS** above.

   Before Linux 4.11, any process terminated in this way would not
   trigger a coredump (even though **SIGSYS** is documented in
   **signal**\ (7) as having a default action of termination with a core
   dump). Since Linux 4.11, a single-threaded process will dump core if
   terminated in this way.

   With the addition of **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_PROCESS** in Linux 4.14,
   **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_THREAD** was added as a synonym for
   **SECCOMP_RET_KILL**, in order to more clearly distinguish the two
   actions.

**SECCOMP_RET_TRAP**
   This value results in the kernel sending a thread-directed **SIGSYS**
   signal to the triggering thread. (The system call is not executed.)
   Various fields will be set in the *siginfo_t* structure (see
   **sigaction**\ (2)) associated with signal:

   -  *si_signo* will contain **SIGSYS**.

   -  *si_call_addr* will show the address of the system call
      instruction.

   -  *si_syscall* and *si_arch* will indicate which system call was
      attempted.

   -  *si_code* will contain **SYS_SECCOMP**.

   -  *si_errno* will contain the **SECCOMP_RET_DATA** portion of the
      filter return value.

   The program counter will be as though the system call happened (i.e.,
   the program counter will not point to the system call instruction).
   The return value register will contain an architecture-dependent
   value; if resuming execution, set it to something appropriate for the
   system call. (The architecture dependency is because replacing it
   with **ENOSYS** could overwrite some useful information.)

**SECCOMP_RET_ERRNO**
   This value results in the **SECCOMP_RET_DATA** portion of the
   filter's return value being passed to user space as the *errno* value
   without executing the system call.

**SECCOMP_RET_TRACE**
   When returned, this value will cause the kernel to attempt to notify
   a **ptrace**\ (2)-based tracer prior to executing the system call. If
   there is no tracer present, the system call is not executed and
   returns a failure status with *errno* set to **ENOSYS**.

   A tracer will be notified if it requests **PTRACE_O_TRACESECCOMP**
   using *ptrace(PTRACE_SETOPTIONS)*. The tracer will be notified of a
   **PTRACE_EVENT_SECCOMP** and the **SECCOMP_RET_DATA** portion of the
   filter's return value will be available to the tracer via
   **PTRACE_GETEVENTMSG**.

   The tracer can skip the system call by changing the system call
   number to -1. Alternatively, the tracer can change the system call
   requested by changing the system call to a valid system call number.
   If the tracer asks to skip the system call, then the system call will
   appear to return the value that the tracer puts in the return value
   register.

   Before kernel 4.8, the seccomp check will not be run again after the
   tracer is notified. (This means that, on older kernels, seccomp-based
   sandboxes **must not** allow use of **ptrace**\ (2)â€”even of other
   sandboxed processesâ€”without extreme care; ptracers can use this
   mechanism to escape from the seccomp sandbox.)

**SECCOMP_RET_LOG** (since Linux 4.14)
   This value results in the system call being executed after the filter
   return action is logged. An administrator may override the logging of
   this action via the */proc/sys/kernel/seccomp/actions_logged* file.

**SECCOMP_RET_ALLOW**
   This value results in the system call being executed.

If an action value other than one of the above is specified, then the
filter action is treated as either **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_PROCESS** (since
Linux 4.14) or **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_THREAD** (in Linux 4.13 and earlier).

/proc interfaces
----------------

The files in the directory */proc/sys/kernel/seccomp* provide additional
seccomp information and configuration:

*actions_avail* (since Linux 4.14)
   A read-only ordered list of seccomp filter return actions in string
   form. The ordering, from left-to-right, is in decreasing order of
   precedence. The list represents the set of seccomp filter return
   actions supported by the kernel.

*actions_logged* (since Linux 4.14)
   A read-write ordered list of seccomp filter return actions that are
   allowed to be logged. Writes to the file do not need to be in ordered
   form but reads from the file will be ordered in the same way as the
   *actions_avail* file.

   It is important to note that the value of *actions_logged* does not
   prevent certain filter return actions from being logged when the
   audit subsystem is configured to audit a task. If the action is not
   found in the *actions_logged* file, the final decision on whether to
   audit the action for that task is ultimately left up to the audit
   subsystem to decide for all filter return actions other than
   **SECCOMP_RET_ALLOW**.

   The "allow" string is not accepted in the *actions_logged* file as it
   is not possible to log **SECCOMP_RET_ALLOW** actions. Attempting to
   write "allow" to the file will fail with the error **EINVAL**.

Audit logging of seccomp actions
--------------------------------

Since Linux 4.14, the kernel provides the facility to log the actions
returned by seccomp filters in the audit log. The kernel makes the
decision to log an action based on the action type, whether or not the
action is present in the *actions_logged* file, and whether kernel
auditing is enabled (e.g., via the kernel boot option *audit=1*). The
rules are as follows:

-  If the action is **SECCOMP_RET_ALLOW**, the action is not logged.

-  Otherwise, if the action is either **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_PROCESS** or
   **SECCOMP_RET_KILL_THREAD**, and that action appears in the
   *actions_logged* file, the action is logged.

-  Otherwise, if the filter has requested logging (the
   **SECCOMP_FILTER_FLAG_LOG** flag) and the action appears in the
   *actions_logged* file, the action is logged.

-  Otherwise, if kernel auditing is enabled and the process is being
   audited (**autrace**\ (8)), the action is logged.

-  Otherwise, the action is not logged.

RETURN VALUE
============

On success, **seccomp**\ () returns 0. On error, if
**SECCOMP_FILTER_FLAG_TSYNC** was used, the return value is the ID of
the thread that caused the synchronization failure. (This ID is a kernel
thread ID of the type returned by **clone**\ (2) and **gettid**\ (2).)
On other errors, -1 is returned, and *errno* is set to indicate the
cause of the error.

ERRORS
======

**seccomp**\ () can fail for the following reasons:

**EACCES**
   The caller did not have the **CAP_SYS_ADMIN** capability in its user
   namespace, or had not set *no_new_privs* before using
   **SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER**.

**EFAULT**
   *args* was not a valid address.

**EINVAL**
   *operation* is unknown or is not supported by this kernel version or
   configuration.

**EINVAL**
   The specified *flags* are invalid for the given *operation*.

**EINVAL**
   *operation* included **BPF_ABS**, but the specified offset was not
   aligned to a 32-bit boundary or exceeded *sizeof(struct
   seccomp_data)*.

**EINVAL**
   A secure computing mode has already been set, and *operation* differs
   from the existing setting.

**EINVAL**
   *operation* specified **SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER**, but the filter
   program pointed to by *args* was not valid or the length of the
   filter program was zero or exceeded **BPF_MAXINSNS** (4096)
   instructions.

**ENOMEM**
   Out of memory.

**ENOMEM**
   The total length of all filter programs attached to the calling
   thread would exceed **MAX_INSNS_PER_PATH** (32768) instructions. Note
   that for the purposes of calculating this limit, each already
   existing filter program incurs an overhead penalty of 4 instructions.

**EOPNOTSUPP**
   *operation* specified **SECCOMP_GET_ACTION_AVAIL**, but the kernel
   does not support the filter return action specified by *args*.

**ESRCH**
   Another thread caused a failure during thread sync, but its ID could
   not be determined.

VERSIONS
========

The **seccomp**\ () system call first appeared in Linux 3.17.

CONFORMING TO
=============

The **seccomp**\ () system call is a nonstandard Linux extension.

NOTES
=====

Rather than hand-coding seccomp filters as shown in the example below,
you may prefer to employ the *libseccomp* library, which provides a
front-end for generating seccomp filters.

The *Seccomp* field of the */proc/[pid]/status* file provides a method
of viewing the seccomp mode of a process; see **proc**\ (5).

**seccomp**\ () provides a superset of the functionality provided by the
**prctl**\ (2) **PR_SET_SECCOMP** operation (which does not support
*flags*).

Since Linux 4.4, the **ptrace**\ (2) **PTRACE_SECCOMP_GET_FILTER**
operation can be used to dump a process's seccomp filters.

Architecture support for seccomp BPF
------------------------------------

Architecture support for seccomp BPF filtering is available on the
following architectures:

-  x86-64, i386, x32 (since Linux 3.5)

-  ARM (since Linux 3.8)

-  s390 (since Linux 3.8)

-  MIPS (since Linux 3.16)

-  ARM-64 (since Linux 3.19)

-  PowerPC (since Linux 4.3)

-  Tile (since Linux 4.3)

-  PA-RISC (since Linux 4.6)

Caveats
-------

There are various subtleties to consider when applying seccomp filters
to a program, including the following:

-  Some traditional system calls have user-space implementations in the
   **vdso**\ (7) on many architectures. Notable examples include
   **clock_gettime**\ (2), **gettimeofday**\ (2), and **time**\ (2). On
   such architectures, seccomp filtering for these system calls will
   have no effect. (However, there are cases where the **vdso**\ (7)
   implementations may fall back to invoking the true system call, in
   which case seccomp filters would see the system call.)

-  Seccomp filtering is based on system call numbers. However,
   applications typically do not directly invoke system calls, but
   instead call wrapper functions in the C library which in turn invoke
   the system calls. Consequently, one must be aware of the following:

   -  The glibc wrappers for some traditional system calls may actually
      employ system calls with different names in the kernel. For
      example, the **exit**\ (2) wrapper function actually employs the
      **exit_group**\ (2) system call, and the **fork**\ (2) wrapper
      function actually calls **clone**\ (2).

   -  The behavior of wrapper functions may vary across architectures,
      according to the range of system calls provided on those
      architectures. In other words, the same wrapper function may
      invoke different system calls on different architectures.

   -  Finally, the behavior of wrapper functions can change across glibc
      versions. For example, in older versions, the glibc wrapper
      function for **open**\ (2) invoked the system call of the same
      name, but starting in glibc 2.26, the implementation switched to
      calling **openat**\ (2) on all architectures.

The consequence of the above points is that it may be necessary to
filter for a system call other than might be expected. Various manual
pages in Section 2 provide helpful details about the differences between
wrapper functions and the underlying system calls in subsections
entitled *C library/kernel differences*.

Furthermore, note that the application of seccomp filters even risks
causing bugs in an application, when the filters cause unexpected
failures for legitimate operations that the application might need to
perform. Such bugs may not easily be discovered when testing the seccomp
filters if the bugs occur in rarely used application code paths.

Seccomp-specific BPF details
----------------------------

Note the following BPF details specific to seccomp filters:

-  The **BPF_H** and **BPF_B** size modifiers are not supported: all
   operations must load and store (4-byte) words (**BPF_W**).

-  To access the contents of the *seccomp_data* buffer, use the
   **BPF_ABS** addressing mode modifier.

-  The **BPF_LEN** addressing mode modifier yields an immediate mode
   operand whose value is the size of the *seccomp_data* buffer.

EXAMPLES
========

The program below accepts four or more arguments. The first three
arguments are a system call number, a numeric architecture identifier,
and an error number. The program uses these values to construct a BPF
filter that is used at run time to perform the following checks:

-  If the program is not running on the specified architecture, the BPF
   filter causes system calls to fail with the error **ENOSYS**.

-  If the program attempts to execute the system call with the specified
   number, the BPF filter causes the system call to fail, with *errno*
   being set to the specified error number.

The remaining command-line arguments specify the pathname and additional
arguments of a program that the example program should attempt to
execute using **execv**\ (3) (a library function that employs the
**execve**\ (2) system call). Some example runs of the program are shown
below.

First, we display the architecture that we are running on (x86-64) and
then construct a shell function that looks up system call numbers on
this architecture:

::

   $ uname -m
   x86_64
   $ syscall_nr() {
       cat /usr/src/linux/arch/x86/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl | \
       awk '$2 != "x32" && $3 == "'$1'" { print $1 }'
   }

When the BPF filter rejects a system call (case [2] above), it causes
the system call to fail with the error number specified on the command
line. In the experiments shown here, we'll use error number 99:

::

   $ errno 99
   EADDRNOTAVAIL 99 Cannot assign requested address

In the following example, we attempt to run the command **whoami**\ (1),
but the BPF filter rejects the **execve**\ (2) system call, so that the
command is not even executed:

::

   $ syscall_nr execve
   59
   $ ./a.out
   Usage: ./a.out <syscall_nr> <arch> <errno> <prog> [<args>]
   Hint for <arch>: AUDIT_ARCH_I386: 0x40000003
                    AUDIT_ARCH_X86_64: 0xC000003E
   $ ./a.out 59 0xC000003E 99 /bin/whoami
   execv: Cannot assign requested address

In the next example, the BPF filter rejects the **write**\ (2) system
call, so that, although it is successfully started, the **whoami**\ (1)
command is not able to write output:

::

   $ syscall_nr write
   1
   $ ./a.out 1 0xC000003E 99 /bin/whoami

In the final example, the BPF filter rejects a system call that is not
used by the **whoami**\ (1) command, so it is able to successfully
execute and produce output:

::

   $ syscall_nr preadv
   295
   $ ./a.out 295 0xC000003E 99 /bin/whoami
   cecilia

Program source
--------------

::

   #include <errno.h>
   #include <stddef.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <linux/audit.h>
   #include <linux/filter.h>
   #include <linux/seccomp.h>
   #include <sys/prctl.h>

   #define X32_SYSCALL_BIT 0x40000000

   static int
   install_filter(int syscall_nr, int t_arch, int f_errno)
   {
       unsigned int upper_nr_limit = 0xffffffff;

       /* Assume that AUDIT_ARCH_X86_64 means the normal x86-64 ABI
          (in the x32 ABI, all system calls have bit 30 set in the
          'nr' field, meaning the numbers are >= X32_SYSCALL_BIT) */
       if (t_arch == AUDIT_ARCH_X86_64)
           upper_nr_limit = X32_SYSCALL_BIT - 1;

       struct sock_filter filter[] = {
           /* [0] Load architecture from 'seccomp_data' buffer into
                  accumulator */
           BPF_STMT(BPF_LD | BPF_W | BPF_ABS,
                    (offsetof(struct seccomp_data, arch))),

           /* [1] Jump forward 5 instructions if architecture does not
                  match 't_arch' */
           BPF_JUMP(BPF_JMP | BPF_JEQ | BPF_K, t_arch, 0, 5),

           /* [2] Load system call number from 'seccomp_data' buffer into
                  accumulator */
           BPF_STMT(BPF_LD | BPF_W | BPF_ABS,
                    (offsetof(struct seccomp_data, nr))),

           /* [3] Check ABI - only needed for x86-64 in deny-list use
                  cases.  Use BPF_JGT instead of checking against the bit
                  mask to avoid having to reload the syscall number. */
           BPF_JUMP(BPF_JMP | BPF_JGT | BPF_K, upper_nr_limit, 3, 0),

           /* [4] Jump forward 1 instruction if system call number
                  does not match 'syscall_nr' */
           BPF_JUMP(BPF_JMP | BPF_JEQ | BPF_K, syscall_nr, 0, 1),

           /* [5] Matching architecture and system call: don't execute
              the system call, and return 'f_errno' in 'errno' */
           BPF_STMT(BPF_RET | BPF_K,
                    SECCOMP_RET_ERRNO | (f_errno & SECCOMP_RET_DATA)),

           /* [6] Destination of system call number mismatch: allow other
                  system calls */
           BPF_STMT(BPF_RET | BPF_K, SECCOMP_RET_ALLOW),

           /* [7] Destination of architecture mismatch: kill task */
           BPF_STMT(BPF_RET | BPF_K, SECCOMP_RET_KILL),
       };

       struct sock_fprog prog = {
           .len = (unsigned short) (sizeof(filter) / sizeof(filter[0])),
           .filter = filter,
       };

       if (seccomp(SECCOMP_SET_MODE_FILTER, 0, &prog)) {
           perror("seccomp");
           return 1;
       }

       return 0;
   }

   int
   main(int argc, char **argv)
   {
       if (argc < 5) {
           fprintf(stderr, "Usage: "
                   "%s <syscall_nr> <arch> <errno> <prog> [<args>]\n"
                   "Hint for <arch>: AUDIT_ARCH_I386: 0x%X\n"
                   "                 AUDIT_ARCH_X86_64: 0x%X\n"
                   "\n", argv[0], AUDIT_ARCH_I386, AUDIT_ARCH_X86_64);
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       if (prctl(PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS, 1, 0, 0, 0)) {
           perror("prctl");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       if (install_filter(strtol(argv[1], NULL, 0),
                          strtol(argv[2], NULL, 0),
                          strtol(argv[3], NULL, 0)))
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);

       execv(argv[4], &argv[4]);
       perror("execv");
       exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

SEE ALSO
========

**bpfc**\ (1), **strace**\ (1), **bpf**\ (2), **prctl**\ (2),
**ptrace**\ (2), **sigaction**\ (2), **proc**\ (5), **signal**\ (7),
**socket**\ (7)

Various pages from the *libseccomp* library, including:
**scmp_sys_resolver**\ (1), **seccomp_export_bpf**\ (3),
**seccomp_init**\ (3), **seccomp_load**\ (3), and
**seccomp_rule_add**\ (3).

The kernel source files *Documentation/networking/filter.txt* and
*Documentation/userspace-api/seccomp_filter.rst* (or
*Documentation/prctl/seccomp_filter.txt* before Linux 4.13).

McCanne, S. and Jacobson, V. (1992) *The BSD Packet Filter: A New
Architecture for User-level Packet Capture*, Proceedings of the USENIX
Winter 1993 Conference
` <http://www.tcpdump.org/papers/bpf-usenix93.pdf>`__
