NAME
====

inotify - monitoring filesystem events

DESCRIPTION
===========

The *inotify* API provides a mechanism for monitoring filesystem events.
Inotify can be used to monitor individual files, or to monitor
directories. When a directory is monitored, inotify will return events
for the directory itself, and for files inside the directory.

The following system calls are used with this API:

-  **inotify_init**\ (2) creates an inotify instance and returns a file
   descriptor referring to the inotify instance. The more recent
   **inotify_init1**\ (2) is like **inotify_init**\ (2), but has a
   *flags* argument that provides access to some extra functionality.

-  **inotify_add_watch**\ (2) manipulates the "watch list" associated
   with an inotify instance. Each item ("watch") in the watch list
   specifies the pathname of a file or directory, along with some set of
   events that the kernel should monitor for the file referred to by
   that pathname. **inotify_add_watch**\ (2) either creates a new watch
   item, or modifies an existing watch. Each watch has a unique "watch
   descriptor", an integer returned by **inotify_add_watch**\ (2) when
   the watch is created.

-  When events occur for monitored files and directories, those events
   are made available to the application as structured data that can be
   read from the inotify file descriptor using **read**\ (2) (see
   below).

-  **inotify_rm_watch**\ (2) removes an item from an inotify watch list.

-  When all file descriptors referring to an inotify instance have been
   closed (using **close**\ (2)), the underlying object and its
   resources are freed for reuse by the kernel; all associated watches
   are automatically freed.

With careful programming, an application can use inotify to efficiently
monitor and cache the state of a set of filesystem objects. However,
robust applications should allow for the fact that bugs in the
monitoring logic or races of the kind described below may leave the
cache inconsistent with the filesystem state. It is probably wise to do
some consistency checking, and rebuild the cache when inconsistencies
are detected.

Reading events from an inotify file descriptor
----------------------------------------------

To determine what events have occurred, an application **read**\ (2)s
from the inotify file descriptor. If no events have so far occurred,
then, assuming a blocking file descriptor, **read**\ (2) will block
until at least one event occurs (unless interrupted by a signal, in
which case the call fails with the error **EINTR**; see
**signal**\ (7)).

Each successful **read**\ (2) returns a buffer containing one or more of
the following structures:

::

   struct inotify_event {
       int      wd;       /* Watch descriptor */
       uint32_t mask;     /* Mask describing event */
       uint32_t cookie;   /* Unique cookie associating related
                             events (for rename(2)) */
       uint32_t len;      /* Size of name field */
       char     name[];   /* Optional null-terminated name */
   };

*wd* identifies the watch for which this event occurs. It is one of the
watch descriptors returned by a previous call to
**inotify_add_watch**\ (2).

*mask* contains bits that describe the event that occurred (see below).

*cookie* is a unique integer that connects related events. Currently,
this is used only for rename events, and allows the resulting pair of
**IN_MOVED_FROM** and **IN_MOVED_TO** events to be connected by the
application. For all other event types, *cookie* is set to 0.

The *name* field is present only when an event is returned for a file
inside a watched directory; it identifies the filename within the
watched directory. This filename is null-terminated, and may include
further null bytes ('\0') to align subsequent reads to a suitable
address boundary.

The *len* field counts all of the bytes in *name*, including the null
bytes; the length of each *inotify_event* structure is thus
*sizeof(struct inotify_event)+len*.

The behavior when the buffer given to **read**\ (2) is too small to
return information about the next event depends on the kernel version:
in kernels before 2.6.21, **read**\ (2) returns 0; since kernel 2.6.21,
**read**\ (2) fails with the error **EINVAL**. Specifying a buffer of
size

sizeof(struct inotify_event) + NAME_MAX + 1

will be sufficient to read at least one event.

inotify events
--------------

The **inotify_add_watch**\ (2) *mask* argument and the *mask* field of
the *inotify_event* structure returned when **read**\ (2)ing an inotify
file descriptor are both bit masks identifying inotify events. The
following bits can be specified in *mask* when calling
**inotify_add_watch**\ (2) and may be returned in the *mask* field
returned by **read**\ (2):

   **IN_ACCESS** (+)
      File was accessed (e.g., **read**\ (2), **execve**\ (2)).

   **IN_ATTRIB** (*)
      Metadata changedâ€”for example, permissions (e.g., **chmod**\ (2)),
      timestamps (e.g., **utimensat**\ (2)), extended attributes
      (**setxattr**\ (2)), link count (since Linux 2.6.25; e.g., for the
      target of **link**\ (2) and for **unlink**\ (2)), and user/group
      ID (e.g., **chown**\ (2)).

   **IN_CLOSE_WRITE** (+)
      File opened for writing was closed.

   **IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE** (*)
      File or directory not opened for writing was closed.

   **IN_CREATE** (+)
      File/directory created in watched directory (e.g., **open**\ (2)
      **O_CREAT**, **mkdir**\ (2), **link**\ (2), **symlink**\ (2),
      **bind**\ (2) on a UNIX domain socket).

   **IN_DELETE** (+)
      File/directory deleted from watched directory.

   **IN_DELETE_SELF**
      Watched file/directory was itself deleted. (This event also occurs
      if an object is moved to another filesystem, since **mv**\ (1) in
      effect copies the file to the other filesystem and then deletes it
      from the original filesystem.) In addition, an **IN_IGNORED**
      event will subsequently be generated for the watch descriptor.

   **IN_MODIFY** (+)
      File was modified (e.g., **write**\ (2), **truncate**\ (2)).

   **IN_MOVE_SELF**
      Watched file/directory was itself moved.

   **IN_MOVED_FROM** (+)
      Generated for the directory containing the old filename when a
      file is renamed.

   **IN_MOVED_TO** (+)
      Generated for the directory containing the new filename when a
      file is renamed.

   **IN_OPEN** (*)
      File or directory was opened.

Inotify monitoring is inode-based: when monitoring a file (but not when
monitoring the directory containing a file), an event can be generated
for activity on any link to the file (in the same or a different
directory).

When monitoring a directory:

-  the events marked above with an asterisk (*) can occur both for the
   directory itself and for objects inside the directory; and

-  the events marked with a plus sign (+) occur only for objects inside
   the directory (not for the directory itself).

*Note*: when monitoring a directory, events are not generated for the
files inside the directory when the events are performed via a pathname
(i.e., a link) that lies outside the monitored directory.

When events are generated for objects inside a watched directory, the
*name* field in the returned *inotify_event* structure identifies the
name of the file within the directory.

The **IN_ALL_EVENTS** macro is defined as a bit mask of all of the above
events. This macro can be used as the *mask* argument when calling
**inotify_add_watch**\ (2).

Two additional convenience macros are defined:

   **IN_MOVE**
      Equates to **IN_MOVED_FROM \| IN_MOVED_TO**.

   **IN_CLOSE**
      Equates to **IN_CLOSE_WRITE \| IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE**.

The following further bits can be specified in *mask* when calling
**inotify_add_watch**\ (2):

   **IN_DONT_FOLLOW** (since Linux 2.6.15)
      Don't dereference *pathname* if it is a symbolic link.

   **IN_EXCL_UNLINK** (since Linux 2.6.36)
      By default, when watching events on the children of a directory,
      events are generated for children even after they have been
      unlinked from the directory. This can result in large numbers of
      uninteresting events for some applications (e.g., if watching
      */tmp*, in which many applications create temporary files whose
      names are immediately unlinked). Specifying **IN_EXCL_UNLINK**
      changes the default behavior, so that events are not generated for
      children after they have been unlinked from the watched directory.

   **IN_MASK_ADD**
      If a watch instance already exists for the filesystem object
      corresponding to *pathname*, add (OR) the events in *mask* to the
      watch mask (instead of replacing the mask); the error **EINVAL**
      results if **IN_MASK_CREATE** is also specified.

   **IN_ONESHOT**
      Monitor the filesystem object corresponding to *pathname* for one
      event, then remove from watch list.

   **IN_ONLYDIR** (since Linux 2.6.15)
      Watch *pathname* only if it is a directory; the error **ENOTDIR**
      results if *pathname* is not a directory. Using this flag provides
      an application with a race-free way of ensuring that the monitored
      object is a directory.

   **IN_MASK_CREATE** (since Linux 4.18)
      Watch *pathname* only if it does not already have a watch
      associated with it; the error **EEXIST** results if *pathname* is
      already being watched.

      Using this flag provides an application with a way of ensuring
      that new watches do not modify existing ones. This is useful
      because multiple paths may refer to the same inode, and multiple
      calls to **inotify_add_watch**\ (2) without this flag may clobber
      existing watch masks.

The following bits may be set in the *mask* field returned by
**read**\ (2):

   **IN_IGNORED**
      Watch was removed explicitly (**inotify_rm_watch**\ (2)) or
      automatically (file was deleted, or filesystem was unmounted). See
      also BUGS.

   **IN_ISDIR**
      Subject of this event is a directory.

   **IN_Q_OVERFLOW**
      Event queue overflowed (*wd* is -1 for this event).

   **IN_UNMOUNT**
      Filesystem containing watched object was unmounted. In addition,
      an **IN_IGNORED** event will subsequently be generated for the
      watch descriptor.

Examples
--------

Suppose an application is watching the directory *dir* and the file
*dir/myfile* for all events. The examples below show some events that
will be generated for these two objects.

   fd = open("dir/myfile", O_RDWR);
      Generates **IN_OPEN** events for both *dir* and *dir/myfile*.

   read(fd, buf, count);
      Generates **IN_ACCESS** events for both *dir* and *dir/myfile*.

   write(fd, buf, count);
      Generates **IN_MODIFY** events for both *dir* and *dir/myfile*.

   fchmod(fd, mode);
      Generates **IN_ATTRIB** events for both *dir* and *dir/myfile*.

   close(fd);
      Generates **IN_CLOSE_WRITE** events for both *dir* and
      *dir/myfile*.

Suppose an application is watching the directories *dir1* and *dir2*,
and the file *dir1/myfile*. The following examples show some events that
may be generated.

   link("dir1/myfile", "dir2/new");
      Generates an **IN_ATTRIB** event for *myfile* and an **IN_CREATE**
      event for *dir2*.

   rename("dir1/myfile", "dir2/myfile");
      Generates an **IN_MOVED_FROM** event for *dir1*, an
      **IN_MOVED_TO** event for *dir2*, and an **IN_MOVE_SELF** event
      for *myfile*. The **IN_MOVED_FROM** and **IN_MOVED_TO** events
      will have the same *cookie* value.

Suppose that *dir1/xx* and *dir2/yy* are (the only) links to the same
file, and an application is watching *dir1*, *dir2*, *dir1/xx*, and
*dir2/yy*. Executing the following calls in the order given below will
generate the following events:

   unlink("dir2/yy");
      Generates an **IN_ATTRIB** event for *xx* (because its link count
      changes) and an **IN_DELETE** event for *dir2*.

   unlink("dir1/xx");
      Generates **IN_ATTRIB**, **IN_DELETE_SELF**, and **IN_IGNORED**
      events for *xx*, and an **IN_DELETE** event for *dir1*.

Suppose an application is watching the directory *dir* and (the empty)
directory *dir/subdir*. The following examples show some events that may
be generated.

   mkdir("dir/new", mode);
      Generates an **IN_CREATE \| IN_ISDIR** event for *dir*.

   rmdir("dir/subdir");
      Generates **IN_DELETE_SELF** and **IN_IGNORED** events for
      *subdir*, and an **IN_DELETE \| IN_ISDIR** event for *dir*.

/proc interfaces
----------------

The following interfaces can be used to limit the amount of kernel
memory consumed by inotify:

*/proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_queued_events*
   The value in this file is used when an application calls
   **inotify_init**\ (2) to set an upper limit on the number of events
   that can be queued to the corresponding inotify instance. Events in
   excess of this limit are dropped, but an **IN_Q_OVERFLOW** event is
   always generated.

*/proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_user_instances*
   This specifies an upper limit on the number of inotify instances that
   can be created per real user ID.

*/proc/sys/fs/inotify/max_user_watches*
   This specifies an upper limit on the number of watches that can be
   created per real user ID.

VERSIONS
========

Inotify was merged into the 2.6.13 Linux kernel. The required library
interfaces were added to glibc in version 2.4. (**IN_DONT_FOLLOW**,
**IN_MASK_ADD**, and **IN_ONLYDIR** were added in glibc version 2.5.)

CONFORMING TO
=============

The inotify API is Linux-specific.

NOTES
=====

Inotify file descriptors can be monitored using **select**\ (2),
**poll**\ (2), and **epoll**\ (7). When an event is available, the file
descriptor indicates as readable.

Since Linux 2.6.25, signal-driven I/O notification is available for
inotify file descriptors; see the discussion of **F_SETFL** (for setting
the **O_ASYNC** flag), **F_SETOWN**, and **F_SETSIG** in **fcntl**\ (2).
The *siginfo_t* structure (described in **sigaction**\ (2)) that is
passed to the signal handler has the following fields set: *si_fd* is
set to the inotify file descriptor number; *si_signo* is set to the
signal number; *si_code* is set to **POLL_IN**; and **POLLIN** is set in
*si_band*.

If successive output inotify events produced on the inotify file
descriptor are identical (same *wd*, *mask*, *cookie*, and *name*), then
they are coalesced into a single event if the older event has not yet
been read (but see BUGS). This reduces the amount of kernel memory
required for the event queue, but also means that an application can't
use inotify to reliably count file events.

The events returned by reading from an inotify file descriptor form an
ordered queue. Thus, for example, it is guaranteed that when renaming
from one directory to another, events will be produced in the correct
order on the inotify file descriptor.

The set of watch descriptors that is being monitored via an inotify file
descriptor can be viewed via the entry for the inotify file descriptor
in the process's */proc/[pid]/fdinfo* directory. See **proc**\ (5) for
further details. The **FIONREAD** **ioctl**\ (2) returns the number of
bytes available to read from an inotify file descriptor.

Limitations and caveats
-----------------------

The inotify API provides no information about the user or process that
triggered the inotify event. In particular, there is no easy way for a
process that is monitoring events via inotify to distinguish events that
it triggers itself from those that are triggered by other processes.

Inotify reports only events that a user-space program triggers through
the filesystem API. As a result, it does not catch remote events that
occur on network filesystems. (Applications must fall back to polling
the filesystem to catch such events.) Furthermore, various
pseudo-filesystems such as */proc*, */sys*, and */dev/pts* are not
monitorable with inotify.

The inotify API does not report file accesses and modifications that may
occur because of **mmap**\ (2), **msync**\ (2), and **munmap**\ (2).

The inotify API identifies affected files by filename. However, by the
time an application processes an inotify event, the filename may already
have been deleted or renamed.

The inotify API identifies events via watch descriptors. It is the
application's responsibility to cache a mapping (if one is needed)
between watch descriptors and pathnames. Be aware that directory
renamings may affect multiple cached pathnames.

Inotify monitoring of directories is not recursive: to monitor
subdirectories under a directory, additional watches must be created.
This can take a significant amount time for large directory trees.

If monitoring an entire directory subtree, and a new subdirectory is
created in that tree or an existing directory is renamed into that tree,
be aware that by the time you create a watch for the new subdirectory,
new files (and subdirectories) may already exist inside the
subdirectory. Therefore, you may want to scan the contents of the
subdirectory immediately after adding the watch (and, if desired,
recursively add watches for any subdirectories that it contains).

Note that the event queue can overflow. In this case, events are lost.
Robust applications should handle the possibility of lost events
gracefully. For example, it may be necessary to rebuild part or all of
the application cache. (One simple, but possibly expensive, approach is
to close the inotify file descriptor, empty the cache, create a new
inotify file descriptor, and then re-create watches and cache entries
for the objects to be monitored.)

If a filesystem is mounted on top of a monitored directory, no event is
generated, and no events are generated for objects immediately under the
new mount point. If the filesystem is subsequently unmounted, events
will subsequently be generated for the directory and the objects it
contains.

Dealing with rename() events
----------------------------

As noted above, the **IN_MOVED_FROM** and **IN_MOVED_TO** event pair
that is generated by **rename**\ (2) can be matched up via their shared
cookie value. However, the task of matching has some challenges.

These two events are usually consecutive in the event stream available
when reading from the inotify file descriptor. However, this is not
guaranteed. If multiple processes are triggering events for monitored
objects, then (on rare occasions) an arbitrary number of other events
may appear between the **IN_MOVED_FROM** and **IN_MOVED_TO** events.
Furthermore, it is not guaranteed that the event pair is atomically
inserted into the queue: there may be a brief interval where the
**IN_MOVED_FROM** has appeared, but the **IN_MOVED_TO** has not.

Matching up the **IN_MOVED_FROM** and **IN_MOVED_TO** event pair
generated by **rename**\ (2) is thus inherently racy. (Don't forget that
if an object is renamed outside of a monitored directory, there may not
even be an **IN_MOVED_TO** event.) Heuristic approaches (e.g., assume
the events are always consecutive) can be used to ensure a match in most
cases, but will inevitably miss some cases, causing the application to
perceive the **IN_MOVED_FROM** and **IN_MOVED_TO** events as being
unrelated. If watch descriptors are destroyed and re-created as a
result, then those watch descriptors will be inconsistent with the watch
descriptors in any pending events. (Re-creating the inotify file
descriptor and rebuilding the cache may be useful to deal with this
scenario.)

Applications should also allow for the possibility that the
**IN_MOVED_FROM** event was the last event that could fit in the buffer
returned by the current call to **read**\ (2), and the accompanying
**IN_MOVED_TO** event might be fetched only on the next **read**\ (2),
which should be done with a (small) timeout to allow for the fact that
insertion of the **IN_MOVED_FROM**-**IN_MOVED_TO** event pair is not
atomic, and also the possibility that there may not be any
**IN_MOVED_TO** event.

BUGS
====

Before Linux 3.19, **fallocate**\ (2) did not create any inotify events.
Since Linux 3.19, calls to **fallocate**\ (2) generate **IN_MODIFY**
events.

In kernels before 2.6.16, the **IN_ONESHOT** *mask* flag does not work.

As originally designed and implemented, the **IN_ONESHOT** flag did not
cause an **IN_IGNORED** event to be generated when the watch was dropped
after one event. However, as an unintended effect of other changes,
since Linux 2.6.36, an **IN_IGNORED** event is generated in this case.

Before kernel 2.6.25, the kernel code that was intended to coalesce
successive identical events (i.e., the two most recent events could
potentially be coalesced if the older had not yet been read) instead
checked if the most recent event could be coalesced with the *oldest*
unread event.

When a watch descriptor is removed by calling **inotify_rm_watch**\ (2)
(or because a watch file is deleted or the filesystem that contains it
is unmounted), any pending unread events for that watch descriptor
remain available to read. As watch descriptors are subsequently
allocated with **inotify_add_watch**\ (2), the kernel cycles through the
range of possible watch descriptors (0 to **INT_MAX**) incrementally.
When allocating a free watch descriptor, no check is made to see whether
that watch descriptor number has any pending unread events in the
inotify queue. Thus, it can happen that a watch descriptor is
reallocated even when pending unread events exist for a previous
incarnation of that watch descriptor number, with the result that the
application might then read those events and interpret them as belonging
to the file associated with the newly recycled watch descriptor. In
practice, the likelihood of hitting this bug may be extremely low, since
it requires that an application cycle through **INT_MAX** watch
descriptors, release a watch descriptor while leaving unread events for
that watch descriptor in the queue, and then recycle that watch
descriptor. For this reason, and because there have been no reports of
the bug occurring in real-world applications, as of Linux 3.15, no
kernel changes have yet been made to eliminate this possible bug.

EXAMPLES
========

The following program demonstrates the usage of the inotify API. It
marks the directories passed as a command-line arguments and waits for
events of type **IN_OPEN**, **IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE** and **IN_CLOSE_WRITE**.

The following output was recorded while editing the file
*/home/user/temp/foo* and listing directory */tmp*. Before the file and
the directory were opened, **IN_OPEN** events occurred. After the file
was closed, an **IN_CLOSE_WRITE** event occurred. After the directory
was closed, an **IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE** event occurred. Execution of the
program ended when the user pressed the ENTER key.

Example output
--------------

::

   $ ./a.out /tmp /home/user/temp
   Press enter key to terminate.
   Listening for events.
   IN_OPEN: /home/user/temp/foo [file]
   IN_CLOSE_WRITE: /home/user/temp/foo [file]
   IN_OPEN: /tmp/ [directory]
   IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE: /tmp/ [directory]

   Listening for events stopped.

Program source
--------------

::

   #include <errno.h>
   #include <poll.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <sys/inotify.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <string.h>

   /* Read all available inotify events from the file descriptor 'fd'.
      wd is the table of watch descriptors for the directories in argv.
      argc is the length of wd and argv.
      argv is the list of watched directories.
      Entry 0 of wd and argv is unused. */

   static void
   handle_events(int fd, int *wd, int argc, char* argv[])
   {
       /* Some systems cannot read integer variables if they are not
          properly aligned. On other systems, incorrect alignment may
          decrease performance. Hence, the buffer used for reading from
          the inotify file descriptor should have the same alignment as
          struct inotify_event. */

       char buf[4096]
           __attribute__ ((aligned(__alignof__(struct inotify_event))));
       const struct inotify_event *event;
       int i;
       ssize_t len;
       char *ptr;

       /* Loop while events can be read from inotify file descriptor. */

       for (;;) {

           /* Read some events. */

           len = read(fd, buf, sizeof buf);
           if (len == -1 && errno != EAGAIN) {
               perror("read");
               exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
           }

           /* If the nonblocking read() found no events to read, then
              it returns -1 with errno set to EAGAIN. In that case,
              we exit the loop. */

           if (len <= 0)
               break;

           /* Loop over all events in the buffer */

           for (ptr = buf; ptr < buf + len;
                   ptr += sizeof(struct inotify_event) + event->len) {

               event = (const struct inotify_event *) ptr;

               /* Print event type */

               if (event->mask & IN_OPEN)
                   printf("IN_OPEN: ");
               if (event->mask & IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE)
                   printf("IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE: ");
               if (event->mask & IN_CLOSE_WRITE)
                   printf("IN_CLOSE_WRITE: ");

               /* Print the name of the watched directory */

               for (i = 1; i < argc; ++i) {
                   if (wd[i] == event->wd) {
                       printf("%s/", argv[i]);
                       break;
                   }
               }

               /* Print the name of the file */

               if (event->len)
                   printf("%s", event->name);

               /* Print type of filesystem object */

               if (event->mask & IN_ISDIR)
                   printf(" [directory]\n");
               else
                   printf(" [file]\n");
           }
       }
   }

   int
   main(int argc, char* argv[])
   {
       char buf;
       int fd, i, poll_num;
       int *wd;
       nfds_t nfds;
       struct pollfd fds[2];

       if (argc < 2) {
           printf("Usage: %s PATH [PATH ...]\n", argv[0]);
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       printf("Press ENTER key to terminate.\n");

       /* Create the file descriptor for accessing the inotify API */

       fd = inotify_init1(IN_NONBLOCK);
       if (fd == -1) {
           perror("inotify_init1");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /* Allocate memory for watch descriptors */

       wd = calloc(argc, sizeof(int));
       if (wd == NULL) {
           perror("calloc");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /* Mark directories for events
          - file was opened
          - file was closed */

       for (i = 1; i < argc; i++) {
           wd[i] = inotify_add_watch(fd, argv[i],
                                     IN_OPEN | IN_CLOSE);
           if (wd[i] == -1) {
               fprintf(stderr, "Cannot watch '%s': %s\n",
                       argv[i], strerror(errno));
               exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
           }
       }

       /* Prepare for polling */

       nfds = 2;

       /* Console input */

       fds[0].fd = STDIN_FILENO;
       fds[0].events = POLLIN;

       /* Inotify input */

       fds[1].fd = fd;
       fds[1].events = POLLIN;

       /* Wait for events and/or terminal input */

       printf("Listening for events.\n");
       while (1) {
           poll_num = poll(fds, nfds, -1);
           if (poll_num == -1) {
               if (errno == EINTR)
                   continue;
               perror("poll");
               exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
           }

           if (poll_num > 0) {

               if (fds[0].revents & POLLIN) {

                   /* Console input is available. Empty stdin and quit */

                   while (read(STDIN_FILENO, &buf, 1) > 0 && buf != '\n')
                       continue;
                   break;
               }

               if (fds[1].revents & POLLIN) {

                   /* Inotify events are available */

                   handle_events(fd, wd, argc, argv);
               }
           }
       }

       printf("Listening for events stopped.\n");

       /* Close inotify file descriptor */

       close(fd);

       free(wd);
       exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   }

SEE ALSO
========

**inotifywait**\ (1), **inotifywatch**\ (1), **inotify_add_watch**\ (2),
**inotify_init**\ (2), **inotify_init1**\ (2),
**inotify_rm_watch**\ (2), **read**\ (2), **stat**\ (2),
**fanotify**\ (7)

*Documentation/filesystems/inotify.txt* in the Linux kernel source tree
