NAME
====

unix - sockets for local interprocess communication

SYNOPSIS
========

| **#include <sys/socket.h>**
| **#include <sys/un.h>**

| *unix_socket*\ **= socket(AF_UNIX, type, 0);**
| *error*\ **= socketpair(AF_UNIX, type, 0, int \***\ *sv*\ **);**

DESCRIPTION
===========

The **AF_UNIX** (also known as **AF_LOCAL**) socket family is used to
communicate between processes on the same machine efficiently.
Traditionally, UNIX domain sockets can be either unnamed, or bound to a
filesystem pathname (marked as being of type socket). Linux also
supports an abstract namespace which is independent of the filesystem.

Valid socket types in the UNIX domain are: **SOCK_STREAM**, for a
stream-oriented socket; **SOCK_DGRAM**, for a datagram-oriented socket
that preserves message boundaries (as on most UNIX implementations, UNIX
domain datagram sockets are always reliable and don't reorder
datagrams); and (since Linux 2.6.4) **SOCK_SEQPACKET**, for a
sequenced-packet socket that is connection-oriented, preserves message
boundaries, and delivers messages in the order that they were sent.

UNIX domain sockets support passing file descriptors or process
credentials to other processes using ancillary data.

Address format
--------------

A UNIX domain socket address is represented in the following structure:

::

   struct sockaddr_un {
       sa_family_t sun_family;               /* AF_UNIX */
       char        sun_path[108];            /* Pathname */
   };

The *sun_family* field always contains **AF_UNIX**. On Linux, *sun_path*
is 108 bytes in size; see also NOTES, below.

Various systems calls (for example, **bind**\ (2), **connect**\ (2), and
**sendto**\ (2)) take a *sockaddr_un* argument as input. Some other
system calls (for example, **getsockname**\ (2), **getpeername**\ (2),
**recvfrom**\ (2), and **accept**\ (2)) return an argument of this type.

Three types of address are distinguished in the *sockaddr_un* structure:

-  *pathname*: a UNIX domain socket can be bound to a null-terminated
   filesystem pathname using **bind**\ (2). When the address of a
   pathname socket is returned (by one of the system calls noted above),
   its length is

   offsetof(struct sockaddr_un, sun_path) + strlen(sun_path) + 1

   and *sun_path* contains the null-terminated pathname. (On Linux, the
   above **offsetof**\ () expression equates to the same value as
   *sizeof(sa_family_t)*, but some other implementations include other
   fields before *sun_path*, so the **offsetof**\ () expression more
   portably describes the size of the address structure.)

   For further details of pathname sockets, see below.

-  *unnamed*: A stream socket that has not been bound to a pathname
   using **bind**\ (2) has no name. Likewise, the two sockets created by
   **socketpair**\ (2) are unnamed. When the address of an unnamed
   socket is returned, its length is *sizeof(sa_family_t)*, and
   *sun_path* should not be inspected.

-  *abstract*: an abstract socket address is distinguished (from a
   pathname socket) by the fact that *sun_path[0]* is a null byte
   ('\0'). The socket's address in this namespace is given by the
   additional bytes in *sun_path* that are covered by the specified
   length of the address structure. (Null bytes in the name have no
   special significance.) The name has no connection with filesystem
   pathnames. When the address of an abstract socket is returned, the
   returned *addrlen* is greater than *sizeof(sa_family_t)* (i.e.,
   greater than 2), and the name of the socket is contained in the first
   *(addrlen - sizeof(sa_family_t))* bytes of *sun_path*.

Pathname sockets
----------------

When binding a socket to a pathname, a few rules should be observed for
maximum portability and ease of coding:

-  The pathname in *sun_path* should be null-terminated.

-  The length of the pathname, including the terminating null byte,
   should not exceed the size of *sun_path*.

-  The *addrlen* argument that describes the enclosing *sockaddr_un*
   structure should have a value of at least:

   ::

          offsetof(struct sockaddr_un, sun_path)+strlen(addr.sun_path)+1

   or, more simply, *addrlen* can be specified as *sizeof(struct
   sockaddr_un)*.

There is some variation in how implementations handle UNIX domain socket
addresses that do not follow the above rules. For example, some (but not
all) implementations append a null terminator if none is present in the
supplied *sun_path*.

When coding portable applications, keep in mind that some
implementations have *sun_path* as short as 92 bytes.

Various system calls (**accept**\ (2), **recvfrom**\ (2),
**getsockname**\ (2), **getpeername**\ (2)) return socket address
structures. When applied to UNIX domain sockets, the value-result
*addrlen* argument supplied to the call should be initialized as above.
Upon return, the argument is set to indicate the *actual* size of the
address structure. The caller should check the value returned in this
argument: if the output value exceeds the input value, then there is no
guarantee that a null terminator is present in *sun_path*. (See BUGS.)

Pathname socket ownership and permissions
-----------------------------------------

In the Linux implementation, pathname sockets honor the permissions of
the directory they are in. Creation of a new socket fails if the process
does not have write and search (execute) permission on the directory in
which the socket is created.

On Linux, connecting to a stream socket object requires write permission
on that socket; sending a datagram to a datagram socket likewise
requires write permission on that socket. POSIX does not make any
statement about the effect of the permissions on a socket file, and on
some systems (e.g., older BSDs), the socket permissions are ignored.
Portable programs should not rely on this feature for security.

When creating a new socket, the owner and group of the socket file are
set according to the usual rules. The socket file has all permissions
enabled, other than those that are turned off by the process
**umask**\ (2).

The owner, group, and permissions of a pathname socket can be changed
(using **chown**\ (2) and **chmod**\ (2)).

Abstract sockets
----------------

Socket permissions have no meaning for abstract sockets: the process
**umask**\ (2) has no effect when binding an abstract socket, and
changing the ownership and permissions of the object (via
**fchown**\ (2) and **fchmod**\ (2)) has no effect on the accessibility
of the socket.

Abstract sockets automatically disappear when all open references to the
socket are closed.

The abstract socket namespace is a nonportable Linux extension.

Socket options
--------------

For historical reasons, these socket options are specified with a
**SOL_SOCKET** type even though they are **AF_UNIX** specific. They can
be set with **setsockopt**\ (2) and read with **getsockopt**\ (2) by
specifying **SOL_SOCKET** as the socket family.

**SO_PASSCRED**
   Enabling this socket option causes receipt of the credentials of the
   sending process in an **SCM_CREDENTIALS ancillary** message in each
   subsequently received message. The returned credentials are those
   specified by the sender using **SCM_CREDENTIALS**, or a default that
   includes the sender's PID, real user ID, and real group ID, if the
   sender did not specify **SCM_CREDENTIALS** ancillary data.

   When this option is set and the socket is not yet connected, a unique
   name in the abstract namespace will be generated automatically.

   The value given as an argument to **setsockopt**\ (2) and returned as
   the result of **getsockopt**\ (2) is an integer boolean flag.

**SO_PASSSEC**
   Enables receiving of the SELinux security label of the peer socket in
   an ancillary message of type **SCM_SECURITY** (see below).

   The value given as an argument to **setsockopt**\ (2) and returned as
   the result of **getsockopt**\ (2) is an integer boolean flag.

   The **SO_PASSSEC** option is supported for UNIX domain datagram
   sockets since Linux 2.6.18; support for UNIX domain stream sockets
   was added in Linux 4.2.

**SO_PEEK_OFF**
   See **socket**\ (7).

**SO_PEERCRED**
   This read-only socket option returns the credentials of the peer
   process connected to this socket. The returned credentials are those
   that were in effect at the time of the call to **connect**\ (2) or
   **socketpair**\ (2).

   The argument to **getsockopt**\ (2) is a pointer to a *ucred*
   structure; define the **\_GNU_SOURCE** feature test macro to obtain
   the definition of that structure from *<sys/socket.h>*.

   The use of this option is possible only for connected **AF_UNIX**
   stream sockets and for **AF_UNIX** stream and datagram socket pairs
   created using **socketpair**\ (2).

Autobind feature
----------------

If a **bind**\ (2) call specifies *addrlen* as *sizeof(sa_family_t)*, or
the **SO_PASSCRED** socket option was specified for a socket that was
not explicitly bound to an address, then the socket is autobound to an
abstract address. The address consists of a null byte followed by 5
bytes in the character set *[0-9a-f]*. Thus, there is a limit of 2^20
autobind addresses. (From Linux 2.1.15, when the autobind feature was
added, 8 bytes were used, and the limit was thus 2^32 autobind
addresses. The change to 5 bytes came in Linux 2.3.15.)

Sockets API
-----------

The following paragraphs describe domain-specific details and
unsupported features of the sockets API for UNIX domain sockets on
Linux.

UNIX domain sockets do not support the transmission of out-of-band data
(the **MSG_OOB** flag for **send**\ (2) and **recv**\ (2)).

The **send**\ (2) **MSG_MORE** flag is not supported by UNIX domain
sockets.

Before Linux 3.4, the use of **MSG_TRUNC** in the *flags* argument of
**recv**\ (2) was not supported by UNIX domain sockets.

The **SO_SNDBUF** socket option does have an effect for UNIX domain
sockets, but the **SO_RCVBUF** option does not. For datagram sockets,
the **SO_SNDBUF** value imposes an upper limit on the size of outgoing
datagrams. This limit is calculated as the doubled (see **socket**\ (7))
option value less 32 bytes used for overhead.

Ancillary messages
------------------

Ancillary data is sent and received using **sendmsg**\ (2) and
**recvmsg**\ (2). For historical reasons, the ancillary message types
listed below are specified with a **SOL_SOCKET** type even though they
are **AF_UNIX** specific. To send them, set the *cmsg_level* field of
the struct *cmsghdr* to **SOL_SOCKET** and the *cmsg_type* field to the
type. For more information, see **cmsg**\ (3).

**SCM_RIGHTS**
   Send or receive a set of open file descriptors from another process.
   The data portion contains an integer array of the file descriptors.

   Commonly, this operation is referred to as "passing a file
   descriptor" to another process. However, more accurately, what is
   being passed is a reference to an open file description (see
   **open**\ (2)), and in the receiving process it is likely that a
   different file descriptor number will be used. Semantically, this
   operation is equivalent to duplicating (**dup**\ (2)) a file
   descriptor into the file descriptor table of another process.

   If the buffer used to receive the ancillary data containing file
   descriptors is too small (or is absent), then the ancillary data is
   truncated (or discarded) and the excess file descriptors are
   automatically closed in the receiving process.

   If the number of file descriptors received in the ancillary data
   would cause the process to exceed its **RLIMIT_NOFILE** resource
   limit (see **getrlimit**\ (2)), the excess file descriptors are
   automatically closed in the receiving process.

   The kernel constant **SCM_MAX_FD** defines a limit on the number of
   file descriptors in the array. Attempting to send an array larger
   than this limit causes **sendmsg**\ (2) to fail with the error
   **EINVAL**. **SCM_MAX_FD** has the value 253 (or 255 in kernels
   before 2.6.38).

**SCM_CREDENTIALS**
   Send or receive UNIX credentials. This can be used for
   authentication. The credentials are passed as a *struct ucred*
   ancillary message. This structure is defined in *<sys/socket.h>* as
   follows:

   ::

      struct ucred {
          pid_t pid;    /* Process ID of the sending process */
          uid_t uid;    /* User ID of the sending process */
          gid_t gid;    /* Group ID of the sending process */
      };

   Since glibc 2.8, the **\_GNU_SOURCE** feature test macro must be
   defined (before including *any* header files) in order to obtain the
   definition of this structure.

   The credentials which the sender specifies are checked by the kernel.
   A privileged process is allowed to specify values that do not match
   its own. The sender must specify its own process ID (unless it has
   the capability **CAP_SYS_ADMIN**, in which case the PID of any
   existing process may be specified), its real user ID, effective user
   ID, or saved set-user-ID (unless it has **CAP_SETUID**), and its real
   group ID, effective group ID, or saved set-group-ID (unless it has
   **CAP_SETGID**).

   To receive a *struct ucred* message, the **SO_PASSCRED** option must
   be enabled on the socket.

**SCM_SECURITY**
   Receive the SELinux security context (the security label) of the peer
   socket. The received ancillary data is a null-terminated string
   containing the security context. The receiver should allocate at
   least **NAME_MAX** bytes in the data portion of the ancillary message
   for this data.

   To receive the security context, the **SO_PASSSEC** option must be
   enabled on the socket (see above).

When sending ancillary data with **sendmsg**\ (2), only one item of each
of the above types may be included in the sent message.

At least one byte of real data should be sent when sending ancillary
data. On Linux, this is required to successfully send ancillary data
over a UNIX domain stream socket. When sending ancillary data over a
UNIX domain datagram socket, it is not necessary on Linux to send any
accompanying real data. However, portable applications should also
include at least one byte of real data when sending ancillary data over
a datagram socket.

When receiving from a stream socket, ancillary data forms a kind of
barrier for the received data. For example, suppose that the sender
transmits as follows:

   1. **sendmsg**\ (2) of four bytes, with no ancillary data.

   2. **sendmsg**\ (2) of one byte, with ancillary data.

   3. **sendmsg**\ (2) of four bytes, with no ancillary data.

Suppose that the receiver now performs **recvmsg**\ (2) calls each with
a buffer size of 20 bytes. The first call will receive five bytes of
data, along with the ancillary data sent by the second **sendmsg**\ (2)
call. The next call will receive the remaining four bytes of data.

If the space allocated for receiving incoming ancillary data is too
small then the ancillary data is truncated to the number of headers that
will fit in the supplied buffer (or, in the case of an **SCM_RIGHTS**
file descriptor list, the list of file descriptors may be truncated). If
no buffer is provided for incoming ancillary data (i.e., the
*msg_control* field of the *msghdr* structure supplied to
**recvmsg**\ (2) is NULL), then the incoming ancillary data is
discarded. In both of these cases, the **MSG_CTRUNC** flag will be set
in the *msg.msg_flags* value returned by **recvmsg**\ (2).

Ioctls
------

The following **ioctl**\ (2) calls return information in *value*. The
correct syntax is:

   ::

      int value;
      error = ioctl(unix_socket, ioctl_type, &value);

*ioctl_type* can be:

**SIOCINQ**
   For **SOCK_STREAM** sockets, this call returns the number of unread
   bytes in the receive buffer. The socket must not be in LISTEN state,
   otherwise an error (**EINVAL**) is returned. **SIOCINQ** is defined
   in *<linux/sockios.h>*. Alternatively, you can use the synonymous
   **FIONREAD**, defined in *<sys/ioctl.h>*. For **SOCK_DGRAM** sockets,
   the returned value is the same as for Internet domain datagram
   sockets; see **udp**\ (7).

ERRORS
======

**EADDRINUSE**
   The specified local address is already in use or the filesystem
   socket object already exists.

**EBADF**
   This error can occur for **sendmsg**\ (2) when sending a file
   descriptor as ancillary data over a UNIX domain socket (see the
   description of **SCM_RIGHTS**, above), and indicates that the file
   descriptor number that is being sent is not valid (e.g., it is not an
   open file descriptor).

**ECONNREFUSED**
   The remote address specified by **connect**\ (2) was not a listening
   socket. This error can also occur if the target pathname is not a
   socket.

**ECONNRESET**
   Remote socket was unexpectedly closed.

**EFAULT**
   User memory address was not valid.

**EINVAL**
   Invalid argument passed. A common cause is that the value **AF_UNIX**
   was not specified in the *sun_type* field of passed addresses, or the
   socket was in an invalid state for the applied operation.

**EISCONN**
   **connect**\ (2) called on an already connected socket or a target
   address was specified on a connected socket.

**ENOENT**
   The pathname in the remote address specified to **connect**\ (2) did
   not exist.

**ENOMEM**
   Out of memory.

**ENOTCONN**
   Socket operation needs a target address, but the socket is not
   connected.

**EOPNOTSUPP**
   Stream operation called on non-stream oriented socket or tried to use
   the out-of-band data option.

**EPERM**
   The sender passed invalid credentials in the *struct ucred*.

**EPIPE**
   Remote socket was closed on a stream socket. If enabled, a
   **SIGPIPE** is sent as well. This can be avoided by passing the
   **MSG_NOSIGNAL** flag to **send**\ (2) or **sendmsg**\ (2).

**EPROTONOSUPPORT**
   Passed protocol is not **AF_UNIX**.

**EPROTOTYPE**
   Remote socket does not match the local socket type (**SOCK_DGRAM**
   versus **SOCK_STREAM**).

**ESOCKTNOSUPPORT**
   Unknown socket type.

**ESRCH**
   While sending an ancillary message containing credentials
   (**SCM_CREDENTIALS**), the caller specified a PID that does not match
   any existing process.

**ETOOMANYREFS**
   This error can occur for **sendmsg**\ (2) when sending a file
   descriptor as ancillary data over a UNIX domain socket (see the
   description of **SCM_RIGHTS**, above). It occurs if the number of
   "in-flight" file descriptors exceeds the **RLIMIT_NOFILE** resource
   limit and the caller does not have the **CAP_SYS_RESOURCE**
   capability. An in-flight file descriptor is one that has been sent
   using **sendmsg**\ (2) but has not yet been accepted in the recipient
   process using **recvmsg**\ (2).

   This error is diagnosed since mainline Linux 4.5 (and in some earlier
   kernel versions where the fix has been backported). In earlier kernel
   versions, it was possible to place an unlimited number of file
   descriptors in flight, by sending each file descriptor with
   **sendmsg**\ (2) and then closing the file descriptor so that it was
   not accounted against the **RLIMIT_NOFILE** resource limit.

Other errors can be generated by the generic socket layer or by the
filesystem while generating a filesystem socket object. See the
appropriate manual pages for more information.

VERSIONS
========

**SCM_CREDENTIALS** and the abstract namespace were introduced with
Linux 2.2 and should not be used in portable programs. (Some BSD-derived
systems also support credential passing, but the implementation details
differ.)

NOTES
=====

Binding to a socket with a filename creates a socket in the filesystem
that must be deleted by the caller when it is no longer needed (using
**unlink**\ (2)). The usual UNIX close-behind semantics apply; the
socket can be unlinked at any time and will be finally removed from the
filesystem when the last reference to it is closed.

To pass file descriptors or credentials over a **SOCK_STREAM** socket,
you must to send or receive at least one byte of nonancillary data in
the same **sendmsg**\ (2) or **recvmsg**\ (2) call.

UNIX domain stream sockets do not support the notion of out-of-band
data.

BUGS
====

When binding a socket to an address, Linux is one of the implementations
that appends a null terminator if none is supplied in *sun_path*. In
most cases this is unproblematic: when the socket address is retrieved,
it will be one byte longer than that supplied when the socket was bound.
However, there is one case where confusing behavior can result: if 108
non-null bytes are supplied when a socket is bound, then the addition of
the null terminator takes the length of the pathname beyond
*sizeof(sun_path)*. Consequently, when retrieving the socket address
(for example, via **accept**\ (2)), if the input *addrlen* argument for
the retrieving call is specified as *sizeof(struct sockaddr_un)*, then
the returned address structure *won't* have a null terminator in
*sun_path*.

In addition, some implementations don't require a null terminator when
binding a socket (the *addrlen* argument is used to determine the length
of *sun_path*) and when the socket address is retrieved on these
implementations, there is no null terminator in *sun_path*.

Applications that retrieve socket addresses can (portably) code to
handle the possibility that there is no null terminator in *sun_path* by
respecting the fact that the number of valid bytes in the pathname is:

strnlen(addr.sun_path, addrlen - offsetof(sockaddr_un, sun_path))

Alternatively, an application can retrieve the socket address by
allocating a buffer of size *sizeof(struct sockaddr_un)+1* that is
zeroed out before the retrieval. The retrieving call can specify
*addrlen* as *sizeof(struct sockaddr_un)*, and the extra zero byte
ensures that there will be a null terminator for the string returned in
*sun_path*:

::

   void *addrp;

   addrlen = sizeof(struct sockaddr_un);
   addrp = malloc(addrlen + 1);
   if (addrp == NULL)
       /* Handle error */ ;
   memset(addrp, 0, addrlen + 1);

   if (getsockname(sfd, (struct sockaddr *) addrp, &addrlen)) == -1)
       /* handle error */ ;

   printf("sun_path = %s\n", ((struct sockaddr_un *) addrp)->sun_path);

This sort of messiness can be avoided if it is guaranteed that the
applications that *create* pathname sockets follow the rules outlined
above under *Pathname sockets*.

EXAMPLES
========

The following code demonstrates the use of sequenced-packet sockets for
local interprocess communication. It consists of two programs. The
server program waits for a connection from the client program. The
client sends each of its command-line arguments in separate messages.
The server treats the incoming messages as integers and adds them up.
The client sends the command string "END". The server sends back a
message containing the sum of the client's integers. The client prints
the sum and exits. The server waits for the next client to connect. To
stop the server, the client is called with the command-line argument
"DOWN".

The following output was recorded while running the server in the
background and repeatedly executing the client. Execution of the server
program ends when it receives the "DOWN" command.

Example output
--------------

::

   $ ./server &
   [1] 25887
   $ ./client 3 4
   Result = 7
   $ ./client 11 -5
   Result = 6
   $ ./client DOWN
   Result = 0
   [1]+  Done                    ./server
   $

Program source
--------------

::

   /*
    * File connection.h
    */

   #define SOCKET_NAME "/tmp/9Lq7BNBnBycd6nxy.socket"
   #define BUFFER_SIZE 12

   /*
    * File server.c
    */

   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <sys/socket.h>
   #include <sys/un.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include "connection.h"

   int
   main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       struct sockaddr_un name;
       int down_flag = 0;
       int ret;
       int connection_socket;
       int data_socket;
       int result;
       char buffer[BUFFER_SIZE];

       /* Create local socket. */

       connection_socket = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_SEQPACKET, 0);
       if (connection_socket == -1) {
           perror("socket");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /*
        * For portability clear the whole structure, since some
        * implementations have additional (nonstandard) fields in
        * the structure.
        */

       memset(&name, 0, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));

       /* Bind socket to socket name. */

       name.sun_family = AF_UNIX;
       strncpy(name.sun_path, SOCKET_NAME, sizeof(name.sun_path) - 1);

       ret = bind(connection_socket, (const struct sockaddr *) &name,
                  sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));
       if (ret == -1) {
           perror("bind");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /*
        * Prepare for accepting connections. The backlog size is set
        * to 20. So while one request is being processed other requests
        * can be waiting.
        */

       ret = listen(connection_socket, 20);
       if (ret == -1) {
           perror("listen");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /* This is the main loop for handling connections. */

       for (;;) {

           /* Wait for incoming connection. */

           data_socket = accept(connection_socket, NULL, NULL);
           if (data_socket == -1) {
               perror("accept");
               exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
           }

           result = 0;
           for (;;) {

               /* Wait for next data packet. */

               ret = read(data_socket, buffer, BUFFER_SIZE);
               if (ret == -1) {
                   perror("read");
                   exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
               }

               /* Ensure buffer is 0-terminated. */

               buffer[BUFFER_SIZE - 1] = 0;

               /* Handle commands. */

               if (!strncmp(buffer, "DOWN", BUFFER_SIZE)) {
                   down_flag = 1;
                   break;
               }

               if (!strncmp(buffer, "END", BUFFER_SIZE)) {
                   break;
               }

               /* Add received summand. */

               result += atoi(buffer);
           }

           /* Send result. */

           sprintf(buffer, "%d", result);
           ret = write(data_socket, buffer, BUFFER_SIZE);
           if (ret == -1) {
               perror("write");
               exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
           }

           /* Close socket. */

           close(data_socket);

           /* Quit on DOWN command. */

           if (down_flag) {
               break;
           }
       }

       close(connection_socket);

       /* Unlink the socket. */

       unlink(SOCKET_NAME);

       exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   }

   /*
    * File client.c
    */

   #include <errno.h>
   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <sys/socket.h>
   #include <sys/un.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include "connection.h"

   int
   main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       struct sockaddr_un addr;
       int i;
       int ret;
       int data_socket;
       char buffer[BUFFER_SIZE];

       /* Create local socket. */

       data_socket = socket(AF_UNIX, SOCK_SEQPACKET, 0);
       if (data_socket == -1) {
           perror("socket");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /*
        * For portability clear the whole structure, since some
        * implementations have additional (nonstandard) fields in
        * the structure.
        */

       memset(&addr, 0, sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));

       /* Connect socket to socket address */

       addr.sun_family = AF_UNIX;
       strncpy(addr.sun_path, SOCKET_NAME, sizeof(addr.sun_path) - 1);

       ret = connect (data_socket, (const struct sockaddr *) &addr,
                      sizeof(struct sockaddr_un));
       if (ret == -1) {
           fprintf(stderr, "The server is down.\n");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /* Send arguments. */

       for (i = 1; i < argc; ++i) {
           ret = write(data_socket, argv[i], strlen(argv[i]) + 1);
           if (ret == -1) {
               perror("write");
               break;
           }
       }

       /* Request result. */

       strcpy (buffer, "END");
       ret = write(data_socket, buffer, strlen(buffer) + 1);
       if (ret == -1) {
           perror("write");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /* Receive result. */

       ret = read(data_socket, buffer, BUFFER_SIZE);
       if (ret == -1) {
           perror("read");
           exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
       }

       /* Ensure buffer is 0-terminated. */

       buffer[BUFFER_SIZE - 1] = 0;

       printf("Result = %s\n", buffer);

       /* Close socket. */

       close(data_socket);

       exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   }

For an example of the use of **SCM_RIGHTS** see **cmsg**\ (3).

SEE ALSO
========

**recvmsg**\ (2), **sendmsg**\ (2), **socket**\ (2),
**socketpair**\ (2), **cmsg**\ (3), **capabilities**\ (7),
**credentials**\ (7), **socket**\ (7), **udp**\ (7)
